We have dreamt of making contact with extraterrestrials ever since the advent of the science fiction genre with H.G Wells in the mid-19th century. "War of the Worlds" changed the face of our public consciousness to eventually include the idea that life could exist off of the Earth on other planets like the other one's in our Solar System. We had no way of confirming or denying such possibilities at the time, so public imagination could bloom as vastly as it wished. And of course, when we dreamt about life, we dreamt about what we knew about life. So when we imagined aliens to make contact with, we imagined beings similar to us in many ways but different too, like members of another race, from another country. That's as far as our imagination could reach at the time. It hasn't really reached much further up to the present, unfortunately.

But our lack of imagination is not the subject of this post. Contact with aliens became a real scientific endeavor when technologies for long distance radio telescope signal generation and detection were developed. It is the current understanding that this will be the most likely manner that we will make contact with an extraterrestrial civilization. (If you want to read about problems with the concept of an "extraterrestrial civilization" and other common misconceptions, read the post called "extraterrestrial life," but here let's not worry about that detail and just deal with the contact part. Forgive my use of common language for brevity even though I am admittedly making incorrect statements according to... myself). Today, organizations like SETI (Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence), for example, are dedicated to studying signals and radiation that they can measure with radio telescopes that they get funding to use in an attempt to detect, and recognize properly when they do, a signal that was originated by an another intelligent civilization out there in the cosmos. Other organizations do similar work, but SETI is by far the largest, most consistent, and well known. 

There are several common consistent assumptions that are made when ever we go looking for alien life either in scientific research (like in the case of SETI) or hypothetical thought experiments (like in the case of the Fermi Paradox or the Drake Equation). And these assumptions cause to essentially always look for the wrong thing, every time. They consistently lead us in the wrong direction, and they foil our pursuits at performing otherwise real successful science, instead of chasing pipe dreams that will never come true. But more on that later.  Whether we're thinking about doing it, or we're actually doing it, we're almost always making the same set of very dumb assumptions that are easy to correct once you realize you're making them. 

Those assumptions are that, one, relativity isn't really all that big of a deal, two, we metabolize (think/process/operate) at the "normal" time rate of the cosmos, and any life we would encounter also operates at that rate, and three, reality as we see it is the absolute true/real reality and it is what any other life form would see too, so we would all naturally agree.   

.

Alien civilizations, society, the existence of the "self", how it relates to personal identity, and how all of this depends on a particular evolutionary history is addressed in the post "extraterrestrial life." Here we'll talk about the implications of whatever analog an alien might have to our brain (if any). Contact (or communication) between two organisms depends on a lot of factors. First, similar sensory inputs and outputs must exist for each so that reciprocal "vocalization" (whatever that might "abstractly" be) can take place. We can communicate with other species, like chimpanzees because we both have mouths and ears. We both conveniently use air pressure differentials to communicate throat utterances. This is not really convenient because we are so closely related evolutionarily, it's almost expected. The same reason why dolphins DON'T have ears like us, they are not closely related to us evolutionarily speaking.

If sensory inputs aren't compatible by default, it's possible to develop technology to be an interface that could translate our output signals into an alien's input senses. However, good luck communicating with the species to the level of detail required to design such a device. I guess that's not such a hot idea. Now, framing those assumptions from earlier in the opposite way as their implication would be when we meet an alien and we never addressed the assumption, we would now have a problem on our hands that we never thought of, they have become additional major issues with communicating with a life form that evolved on another planet. I don't know if it's that scientists just don't think about these ideas, or what, because they certainly don't seem to talk about them. But just to reiterate: the assumptions, now posing problems to our communication are, one, the "relativity" problem, two, the "time scale" problem, and three, the "our reality is an illusion" problem. (I know that last one sounded a bit strange put that way, but bare with me, it'll make sense.)

.

So, first problem, Special Relativity, is a very strange beast. It changed the face of physics in a way that no one would have predicted at the time. For more than two hundred years, the smartest man to have walked the earth, the man who invented a branch of mathematics so he could solve one of his own problems, dominated the subject of physics and then suddenly he was corrected by a patent clerk out of seemingly nowhere. It was unheard of. Despite his training at school, Einstein held no fellowship or professorship at the time of the publication that directly refuted the claims of the mighty Principia. The central claim that, not space or time, but the speed of light, was constant, flew in the face of Newtonian physics, which had reigned supreme for generations.

The implications of relativity come down to the idea that everyone carries with them their own clock, the faster you travel, the slower your clock ticks. Not in any illusory way, in a very physical, actual way. So that if you travel near the speed of light, those who don't will age decades while you only age years. Physically. With General Relativity, more implications came to light that included high gravitational fields, acceleration, and eventually black holes. 

So the way that relativity affects us today is that because light is traveling at a fixed speed, when we receive light from long distances in space, we are also receiving it from long times in the past. When we look out into the cosmos, we aren't seeing anything as it is today, We're seeing it as it was how ever many "light-years" away it is. And everything is essentially dozens or more, sometimes hundreds or thousands or more, light-years away.

What this means is that even if we're watching a system, life could be there right now, and we wouldn't see it because what we see is a hundred thousand years ago. Or they could send us a signal right now, but we won't get it for a hundred thousand years (and whose to say we'll survive a hundred thousand years). Or even if we get one signal from a system so far away, so what? Each message back and forth takes that long, there isn't enough time to say anything of meaning, or meet in person, etc. What's the point? Relativity really puts a downer on the whole contact with aliens process. But that's not the worst of it. 

.

We all live our lives in days, months, years, decades, and we all feel like time moves at this rate, like it's supposed to go this fast. But have you ever thought why? It's because of evolution. The Earth spins at a certain rate (the day is so long), it goes around the sun in a certain period (the year is so long). What this translates to is that organisms on this planet are calibrated to metabolize to these values. There are biological clocks that are calibrated to the day cycle, this makes your rain functions operate at a certain speed, your thinking happen at a certain rate. Your sense of time happen at a certain rate. Because of evolution and the length of the day. But if the Earth were larger, the day would be longer, the calibration would e different and your sense of time would be slower. But you know what? You would never realize it without a point of comparison,

So think about it. An alien species evolves on a planet the size of Jupiter (1,300 times the size of Earth), that means they would essentially metabolize and experience time a thousand times slower than us. Literally. Imagine trying to communicate with a being that you perceive to be locked in time.... it doesn't move. You can't get it to respond. To it, we're like bees buzzing around noisily making a big fuss. It wouldn't like that either, probably. First inter-cosmic ball disaster.  And the opposite is true too, imagine a species that evolved on a planet the size of Mercury (one third the size of Earth), it would metabolize three times as fast and go bouncing off the walls of the research facility. The CIA would probably just murder it. Thanks science. 

.

The third problem is the reality problem. I hoped you would bare with me for this one, so hopefully you've made it this far. The reality problem stems from the little known or accepted fact (among the general public, not the neurology community)  that what you perceive, what we all perceive, as the real world is actually an image in your brain. This image is tailor made to keep us alive, and it's not intended to show us the "real" world. It has not intention of showing us what's "true." Evolution created this image mechanism in our heads and it had no intention of showing us what's "true" or "real " beyond what would keep us alive long enough to reproduce. And it's easy to prove. The proof is simply the existence of visual illusions. Visual illusions are examples of when your visual sense is completely tricked into seeing one thing when the actual truth of the reality is a different thing entirely. Ask the police or a lawyer and they will tell you that when a witness is caught in a lie once, you can't trust most of anything else they say. The truth is we can't trust that what we perceive as reality is the "real" world. It suffices our needs for our living in it: navigating, dealing with the weather, dealing with each other, we all happen to agree, which is convenient.

 But when it comes to another species that evolved on another planet, without a human brain, whatever it has, it won't have the same image of reality that we have. There won't be any common interface for us to base any communication on. Math, which has commonly been declared as the universal common ground between us and any hypothetical alien intelligence, is not even really a common ground. Because any way to communicate math lies within the perception of each species, the interfaces are indefinitely split. It's almost analogous to living in parallel universes. For example, it could be argued that you and your dog or cat live in parallel worlds. You each have entirely different perceptions about the worlds you live in. You have entirely different beliefs about what is happening for any given event, you each see the world you live in from entirely different perspectives, sure the matter is the same (the walls, the chairs, the tables), but the meaning of these objects are not the same for your cat as they are for you. The chair is not a chair to your cat, the table is not a table to your dog, the colors (the interpretation of the electromagnetic spectrum) are different for your pets and other animals than they are for you. It would be the same between you and an alien life form, except to an infinite degree. To the point that you would not be able to find common ground, because evolutionary history is not common between us and the alien.  The aliens don't have a brain like us. Whatever the alien has for a "brain" doesn't form an image like it does for us. It forms maybe an image, but an entirely different image, one suited for the alien, from it's own evolution. 

.

Each of these problems is worse than the last. And together they amount to contact with life forms that evolved off the Earth being virtually improbable if not impossible. It's odd when you think about the concept of alien contact in a fundamental way. There is enough sophisticated life on Earth that we have trouble having meaningful communication and contact with, and those life forms are usually very closely related to us in evolutionary terms. And yet when you introduce a life form from an entirely independent evolutionary tract, extraterrestrial life, somehow everyone believes that the possibility for intelligence manifestation and meaningful contact and communication potential skyrockets to nearly 100%. Somehow an independent evolution tract is MORE likely to produce intelligence than the evolution on the Earth that has already shown to produce intelligence in humans. Isn't that odd?

The whole idea that we can be in real contact with life from another planet makes no real sense. The only reason I think we even believe alien contact is even a possibility is from the science fiction genre that has been feeding us stories for over a century. These stories are incredibly powerful and they have created in us our most hopeful dreams and ambitions for the human race. These stories are so powerful that now, even trained scientists can't think outside the box about this stuff.  It's my conclusion that people just don't want to think about it properly about alien contact because then they would have to give up their cherished dreams and ambitions.

Another theory is that our pursuit for alien contact is a pursuit for ourselves (much of the language used in the search for alien contact are human centric words, disregarding any realities that aliens would not possess those traits, ideas, and concepts--there's more about this topic in my post called Extraterrestrial Life). We want to find ourselves to validate that we are not an aberration, that we are normal. In a sense, if we find another "intelligent" species out in the cosmos, it will prove that "intelligence" is "right" and that all the damage we have done to the Earth's environment as a result of our "intelligence" was somehow worth it and justified. 

Finding another alien species as we want to find it, like ourselves, will be extraordinarily validating, and so no one spends all that much time talking about what the realities of alien contact will be, because their only interested in one particular case. The case where we meet our counterpart. But unfortunately, evolution does not produce duplicate species, so that will never happen. We are alone in this cosmos as humans.

There may be many things we can further achieve in our progression as a space fairing species, but alien contact, truly, for many reasons, just won't be one of them.