They say there are a lot of enemies in the world. Evil exists. Good is the opposite. The better. The goal. There are evil people and there are good people. And you can choose either path. 

Of all the evil in the world, everyone has a choice about which one they want to fight. Whether it's oppression of the system and those who support it, or whether it's those who siphon off the value of the system and whose welfare we are all subject to and forced to ensure. 

Others of a more philosophical tone will get deep and say that the only true enemy is time. That fact of nature which we are all subject to, the victims and the oppressors. That thing that no one can defeat, that thing that proves that no amount of value from the system they siphon will ever make them truly better. Everyone dies and is a victim of time in the long run. 

Time is one of those things about reality that no one can deny. Everyone knows about it without being taught about it. It's in our language, it's in our lives, it, in a very real way, is our lives. People can bend it, they can shape it, they can endure it, and they can accept it. But they cannot stop it. They can not remove it. Or benefit from it more than others. We all have our own clocks, but all our clocks feel the exact same to each of us. We never know how time is different in the way that physics says it is. Your clock is wrong, not mine. 

But this is not the only true enemy. I do not deny the above observation, but I wish to make my own. And I am not the only one who makes it. There is another fact about reality that we believe cannot be defeated. While we live in a physical world with concrete boundaries, this is not what I mean. This is not a physical argument. This is a philosophical argument. One which I think is more to the point about oppression. One that explains more about it. One that once I say it, you will have a single thought, which I am predicting already, but one that will prove my point, if you'll be open to seeing it. 

The other true oppressive enemy to us all, the well off and the not well off, other than time, is free will. 

Pay attention. You are probably proving my point as you read this. Was your first thought a laugh? Or a denial? Or something that would diminish what I'm saying? This is it. This is the oppression I'm talking about. 

This is the tautology. Tautologies are oppression. Things that cannot be untrue. Time cannot stop. Evil must exist. Good is definitely better than evil. We certainly have free will. I just demonstrated it by writing these words. Obviously. Without a doubt. Of course. 

How can I even make this argument? Without free will, how could I write these words? How can I assert I do not have free will? If I always tell lies, is this statement a lie? 

The very act of denying free will supports its existence. It, in a very real way, cannot be fought, or even questioned. People who make this argument are laughed out of the room. As much as they try to make it about compassion for prisoners, for the better humane treatment of us all, it falls flat (why would that be?). They appeal, “If we would just stop blaming people for the wrong they do, things would be better.” But it never seems to make it out of the “why do you feel the need to make this argument at all, what wrong did you do?” room. Normal people have no trouble having free will. They should be praised for the good lives they choose to live. Even if they had significantly less trauma in their childhood and past and environment than those who obviously chose to be or do evil.

The barrier to the humane treatment of the misfortunate is exactly the same thing as the benefit bestowed upon those who have not felt as much oppression as the former. Oppression begets oppression. Good is not so good. 

We don't need to be fighting for the humane treatment of prisoners. They will never have the stake in society that is required for anything to change or get better for them. (And they don’t deserve it anyway, right?) We also cannot fight against the benefits given to those at the top who we implicitly believe have made the better choices and whom we all want to hate, but secretly also want to be. And we definitely cannot, absolutely not, try to take away the benefits that we give to, or, rather, just the pedestal upon which we put, people in between these two extremes. The majority of us are too well off, happy, and satisfied with the lives we chose to ever give an inch for anyone else.

In all probability, you believe you have free will. It’s as innate your understanding of yourself as is the flow of time. You know that you performed various choices, for both large and small things, over the course of your life and day. Which school you went to, which car you bought, which job you took, which person you married, which pastry you got at the bakery, etc. You believe that you could have chosen a different choice given the same circumstances, but played backward and forward again. It feels like this at least before the choice pops into your head. In fact, this is true of every thought you have. 

You have this top level sense that you can author your thoughts. You can think of an elephant any time you want. Like now, you’re picturing an elephant, and it was absolutely your choice to do so. You could have resisted. You could have decided not to think of an elephant. Like now, I can’t read your mind, of course, but in all likelihood, you are trying your best not to think of an elephant. Savvy people reading this may have avoided this trap expertly. They would have jumped randomly to a simple happy thought, but again, would this impulse have taken over if you were not reading these words. I did not invent this line of reasoning. It is not new, as appealing as the premise is, it is still not convincing. But why not?

In addition to this, I will further state that people always choose what they think is right. They always choose what is best for them at any given moment. It is literally impossible not to do this. But what does best mean? You feel free to choose pain. Is that what is best for you? It might be, given the situation. Given the long term goals you have, maybe subsisting with some temporary pain or discomfort is best in the long run. Either in the short term or in the long run, you will always choose what you think is good and right. If some action or choice is before you that is neither good for you in the short term or the long run, it is a barred action to you. Of course, only you know this. It would be difficult to study, since this aspect of the human mind is cut off from our current testing techniques.

Free will is a feeling that I have. Of course. I cannot live my life without it. I can hardly speak English, or any other language for that matter, without being subject to its whims. I do not believe I have free will in any absolute sense. I can make small choices like meals and clothes. And I can make large choices like what job to have, who my friends are, and others. But, despite this overwhelming intuition about my activity in the world, I know that this is not always the best guide. The classic example of this being the roundness of the Earth and its motion around its axis and the sun. Even people who do not believe these things are choosing to argue against it because they are driven by a larger sense of right and what is good, despite the overwhelming evidence to the contrary. This phenomena literally manipulates our entire lives and world views.

Marketing is a fantastic wrench in this edifice. For marketing to be the calculable, real result in the real world (that is uncontroversial), messaging from corporations need to influence people’s choices in a statistically significant way. And it is, and it does. This is not even the exception to the rule. This is the rule. If it were the exception, it would not have the billion slash trillion dollar buy-in from the entire world.

I do not have hope that I will convince you. I do not have hope that within my lifetime this will be decided differently (pun intended and unavoidable). But I do have hope. 

The results of this world view (that we have free will) has its origins in the earliest civilizations and religions. And it stands up the machinery of the world. As a last ditch, as yourself if you are authoring the events of the world, or rather, you are waking up each morning and consuming yesterday’s news to find out what happened and how to proceed today. 

This is all very tricky. Anyone who owns anything or benefits from society in any way has a stake in the machine of free will. Oppression is very tricky. It looks different to everybody. My oppression is your benefit. My benefit is your oppression.

This is especially true if you're fortunate enough to be reading these words. 

But I know you are not convinced, you have too much riding on it. It’s ok though, stay unchanged. You literally have no choice.
