In the ocean of life, there are small and big fish. Most are smaller, insignificant, you might say. Most have eyes, but they don't have great eyesight. They can make out basic shades of light and dark. Some fish are able to discern better what they are evolved to see. The fish who are best at eating shrimp can tell a shrimp from a rock. Compared to them, we have great eyesight, among other better attuned senses, where you and I might be able to know the different types of rocks, even though we aren't evolved to know how to do that.

As with eyesight among animals like fish and humans, fish size varies. We have studied fish for a long time. The fish don't understand this as well, but we appreciate the variety of fish in the ocean. Compared to us most fish are small, but some are large. Whether it's a tuna or a whale, if it swims in water, it's a fish. Most fish can see what they are interested in, while most of the rest of what happens in the ocean goes unnoticed by most fish. 

Some marine biologists are smart. They see the variety of sizes of fish and they ask themselves the simple question. Is there a smallest fish? And is there a largest? Certainly this is logical. If fish come in different sizes there is clearly some fish out there that is absolutely bigger than all other fish. And, likewise, there is a fish out there that is equally the smallest. Many have searched. 

Even more have claimed to have found it, only to be outdone the next week by another group of scientists who have found a bigger one. Some marine biologists are sure the one they have found is and will always be the biggest, others are sure it will be the next one. Still others suggest that the way we classify fish should change. But they still agree they should look for and that they will find the best fish out there. The fish against which all other fish should be compared. 

I am of a different mind. 

I am not a marine biologist, so I am no authority on the subject of fish or the best one out there. I am more interested in other questions. 

They have never found the biggest or best fish. I don't think they will. Those that look for it, I feel, are fooling themselves. I said earlier that it is logical that there would be a largest or best fish given any variety of size or quality. This seems obvious.

If a fish is one shade of red and another is a different shade. It would follow that there must be a fish out there that is the most red. The perfect shade of red. 

But then you may ask yourself. What is the perfect shade of red? What are we to look for? 

My physicist friends tell me that red is a wavelength of light, and that there is in fact a perfect definition for the color of red. But I say to them, we are talking about fish, not light. Is there a perfect wavelength of the shade of fish scales? They respond decidedly that the fish scale has no color, it is only the light bouncing off the scale that reaches our eyes that has the color. So, then, yes, there is a fish scale that would reflect a wavelength of light that to our eye would look the perfect shade of red. 

This simply opens my mind to more questions than answers. If a fish scale is beveled, would it reflect the same color all over so that all of the fish were the perfect red? How do we know that our eyes, when the perfect red hits them, even shows us the same wavelength in our minds, or is the color changed in the many connections from the eye to the brain? What apparatus, which measures this wavelength, whether our eye or a camera, can tell us it is the perfect shade of red. Surely we should be looking for the perfect eye or the perfect camera before we embark on the long journey of looking for the perfect red fish. 

I'm awash with confusion and I have not even begun. Sometimes I think my physicist friends enjoy seeing me in this state. I have to admit, it is at least interesting to think about. 

If I am confused, surely everyone is confused. But this is not the case. Many marine biologists (and even physicists who also happen to enjoy marine biology) are sure that the best fish is out there. They are convicted of this despite the many claims of its founding while only the next week they are contradicted. They theorize that a mythical best fish exists out there even without evidence for it.

I may forgive this. I have more trouble when these same marine biologists go further and describe in detail the qualities of this best fish. They give accounts of its size (largest) and color (which amounts to the best color conceivable) and number of scales (more numerous than can be counted). 

I don't know. I can conceive of several colors which are pretty great. 

As may be understandable, I am not much a fan of marine biologists or marine biology. 

I have other interests. 

It would be one thing if marine biologists would even agree among themselves what this best fish was like, but that must be asking too much. 

The marine biologists and their petty squabbles anger me, and the physicists' lessons on light and color confuse me. But I know which one I prefer. 

While the marine biologists argue about which fish is the best, they seem to miss the best thing about the ocean. The undeniable thing that makes it the ocean in the first place. I don't blame them, if I were a fish and knew nothing else, I probably wouldn't think twice about it either. 
