Intelligence is the defining human trait. It is the trait we believe that separates us from all other species on the planet. But what is it? What is it's definition? Over the past two thousand years, philosophers and scientists have struggled to pin down a definitive definition that everyone could agree on. To this day, whole books have been written on the subject of intelligence, whole fields of study have burgeoned, but still there is no clear answer to the question of "what is intelligence?" It's definition, what constitutes an intelligent being or entity, what intelligences itself is, and a reliable way to identify it all still elude our intellectual grasp. 

We prop it up as the highlighting trait that defines us as different and superior to any other living thing. We are the 'most intelligent' things in existence as far as we can tell. Of course we're doing the measuring, so who knows how reliable that is. And we fear to the core of our bones something that is more intelligent than us, either man-made machines that will poetically destroy us or super intelligent and malignant extraterrestrial species that will annihilate or enslave us.

In everyday life, most people have immense insecurities related to their intelligence. It's crippling in most cases where the mere mention of intelligence sends a person into an agitated state at the prospect that they will be found out to be "dumb" because they "lack intelligence."

All this fervor over that precious thing called 'intelligence.' Which we can't define.
		
So what is intelligence? If you even ask the question, one might surmise that you ARE intelligent. Are there other questions one can ask that prove one's intelligence? Are there any actions someone can perform to prove they have the magic?

What about language? Sure, if you can speak, you are intelligent. Ok, so a barking dog is intelligent, that's communication and language, right? Well sort of. Sort of? What does that mean? I have to define the threshold of language that constitutes intelligence? So now we're a full step, and an entire field of study, away from defining the thing we want to define. But for now, we can say that the dog is only a little intelligent, then? Right, only a little bit. So there are degrees? Right. It's getting rather complicated. And this is the problem.
		
Ok, let's try something else. What about decision making. What if I decide to raise my right hand. Is that intelligent? Well, a computer can decide between two options pretty easily, and it's not intelligent like a human, so that doesn't count. Wait, so only intelligence like a human counts? This is beginning to sound rigged.

.

It has been said that the less we know about a topic the more books are written about it. We know a whole lot about gravity, so authors don't waste their time trying to define, categorize, understand, explore, or bank on the general ambiguity of what gravity is and its implications. Because there is no ambiguity (at least certain aspects of it). 

But Intelligence has hundreds of books written on it every year. It's a constantly studied topic of interest, with never ending nuance, speculation, conjecture, and scientific research. Books on the mysteries of the definition, taxonomy, implications, and artificially imbued instances of intelligence are produced, each one in the hopes of answering the ultimate question. What is intelligence? We know we have it (we know we have something), we know other things don't have what we have. We can simulate some behavior we think is intelligent in artificially created entities, but we have no idea what it is.

There are things related to intelligence that we know fairly certainly. So certainly that they are defined by short sentences in a dictionary and have a nearly negligible number of books written about them in all of history. Insight is a good example. People understand what insight is fairly well. It has a hard definition that you can look up in a dictionary. It is easily and simply definable. It's the ability to read between the lines, or see what's going on below the surface, or make an observation that is not immediately obvious, using intuition. There are no musings by researchers, scientists, theologians, or scholars about its definition, implications, or level of degree. No fields of study dedicated to trying to understand and learn more about insight.

From my personal experience, I have been called both intelligent and insightful. For me, I know that the former is a precarious thing to pin my hopes to. Pure intelligence has never been useful to me. It's hard to be intelligent. I have never known what that means, and I honestly hate it. And yet everyone I meet makes the same observation about me: that I am intelligent. To them, it's almost my most defining feature (I'm trying to make a point, not trying to brag). However, insight is a different story. People have noticed my insightfulness too, and I am always struck with a sense of pride by this observation. I believe this one. It's easy to be insightful: it's just there. I don't have to go searching for it. It just happens. I observe the world around me, and those observations are insightful. It's harder to avoid observations that are insightful, than to make them. 

So here we have two traits, intelligence and insight. One is very simple, well defined, and understood. The ship has sailed. Insight is so effortlessly demonstrated that you can't not do it. You can't avoid being insightful. It's reliable and will always work. The other has an infinitely flimsy definition for which tomes have been written to understand, and yet avoids being defined. It does not happen naturally, and takes work to elicit properly. Intelligence does not guarantee success, even though the story of our species pins all the success we have, and will have, on it. It's not reliable, and one will not always be able to demonstrate intelligence all of the time.

.

So, if we know what insight is, is there anything concrete we can really say about intelligence? Possibly. The major difference between insight and intelligence seems to be the relative complexity of phenomenon that can constitute each. This is what we're really talking about. Intelligence avoids a hard definition because we seem to lack the lexicon or even conceptual basis as humans to pin it down. This is an unfortunate limit to human capability, in the modern age of science, there seem to be a number of fields of study that are just so complex that our human conceptual understanding of them is pushed to it's limit. Quantum Mechanics and String Theory are two other notable examples.

So if intelligence is very complex and insight is very simple. There seems to be a hierarchy at play here. One may lead to the other. One may be the building block, or irreducible unit of the other. There could also be something else at play here. It could be that insight is a real thing, and intelligence is the result of several real components, like insight, that when combined with experience of using the skill of insight, per se, manifest into what we call intelligence, but that intelligence as a thing by itself does not really exist.

I believe that insight is a concrete real thing. And that by utilizing your skills at being insightful over enough time, you begin to 'appear' intelligent to other people. But that this 'intelligence' is not always consistent because application of a learned skill is harder to perform than raw talent.

The link between a concrete trait like insight and the ambiguous phenomenon like intelligence seems to be experience. And this makes sense, learning has a large part to play in whether someone is considered intelligent, or smart. 

The reason this is so important is that intelligence amounts to a lie we as humans tell ourselves to supposedly build up our ego, and it backfires in the most horrible of ways. What ends of happening is that the majority of the general population don't identity with this concept of intelligence, they have an infinite insecurity at the heart of their mental powers based on a standard they imagine they should be meeting that they don't think they are meeting. And the worst part is that it's all made up out of thin air. 

Think of it. As humans, we essentially are making this statement "We have intelligence as a humans, which makes us better than all other life on Earth, but we have no idea what intelligence is" Is there any DUMBER statement you could possibly imagine? I have a hard time thinking of one. 

.

It's not just a matter of why bother keeping something going, like the concept of intelligence, when it doesn't help us in any way. It also hinders us greatly. The intelligence industry is booming: games and apps and pills and other quick fix techniques designed to boost and strengthen and tone and create intelligence. The efficacy of these methods is irrelevant. What matters is that people buy into it and that they do it because their inner monologue is telling them that their intelligence is deficient. And most importantly, their self esteem suffers because of it.

When a person's self esteem suffers because of an unfixable problem, it has systemic issues that permeate all other parts of their life. They experience anger, resentment, jealousy, depression, anxiety. They are more willing to engage in and go back to abusive relationships. Stay in jobs that make them miserable. Eat food is that is effectively garbage.

If I was going to point a single cause for many of the issues that plague our society today, it would be that the expectation for people to be smart is extraordinarily high. And it has implications that ripple through the whole of everybody's lives.

All for something that "definitely" exists but no one is sure how to make it better, replicate it, or clearly talk about it, or even simply define it.

.

So why after all of this are we so obsessed with this idea? There's really no easy answer.

It might be because it's legitimate and it's what separates us vainly from other life. It might have religious origins as a type of divine 'gift' that still lingers even in the mostly secular world. Or it might be a totally empty idea that just makes universities, book publishers, scientists, app developers, and researchers gobs of money, all while destroying society from the inside. It could be any of these things.

What's for certain is that it has avoided a proper definition for over two millennia and it's the sole source of indescribable heartache for a lot of otherwise happy, confident, competent people. For the foreseeable decades it will continue to move the human saga forward (or just move it somewhere).

Good thing we're intelligent enough to make up something as useful and beneficial as intelligence.