From my high flying vantage way up in the air, I sway over here and then way over there. I'm at the complete whim of the surrounding atmosphere in its tossles and tizzeles way off the ground, way up here.

My direction is none, my purpose is less, except to be, to the wide open air, a bothersome excess. I have no grounding in any one way, nor have I weight to resist any sway.

My life takes me over all of the world, I cannot hover gently over a village or a cottage at all, no family to look after or region to call home.

I look down from my height sometimes and I see with my speck, an object quite similar to me but it wouldn't be what I expect.

It sits in one place on the earth all the time, it is solid and heavy that even strong men cannot undermine. it does not sway with the wind or the atmosphere like me, but holds its ground gallantly, it's really a sight to see.

So I float along still to this day wherever the air in its fickle whims might take me, and I just wanted to share my story of the dust mote who observed on the ground a solid stationary stone and felt envy

.

From my low vantage point, sitting here on the ground, I can see the world moving and changing about me with a fluidity that is strange to me, embedded here solidly.

The world seems to vibrate and move all about while I stay in one place and cannot seem to get out of the hole that I’m in that is really just my fault for my weight and my stationary fate.

No man can move me, he is not strong enough, nor can a group of them muster the gusto to change my position by even an inch. I am stuck in this place with this singular view of the world all around me that swirls all anew upon every new season that rushes by without reason.

I look up to the sky and if I focus my view I can see a speck floating way up there unbound and totally free. It gracefully follows the sway of the air, floating and moving from this place to that, unlike me who is stuck in the ground with my vision so flat.

I can only imagine it circles the globe and has knowledge of at least one, if not more, of another face, seeing all that there is beyond this particular place. 

It floats freely on air without even a care, and around the world does it see regularly the goings on here, there, everywhere, while I sit in this place unable to move or even to change one little bit, as I watch helplessly the world around me morph and move effortlessly.

So i sit here like usual to this day, and I just wanted to share my story of the large rock who observed in the air the dust mote so light and airy and free and felt for himself a feeling of envy.
