Greetings and welcome to this fraction of time, where we have just some seconds to glimpse in a pinch the proverbial shine of a person which whom we may possibly dine.

You being the guest here in my personal chest you get to rummage and look for whatever might gleam. Be it interests or politics or hiking or cooking, whatever you see to make your heart beam.

Do we both like to hike in the woods on the path, or perhaps do we both maybe like to calculate math? Do we share any interests in music, comedy, movies and tv, even plays about tragedy, or books about Hermoine?

Do we have an affinity for the same almighty divinity? (That would be nice for our lives for simplicity.) Or do we both understand as mature as we are, that for nonsense we put up a no-nonsense bar. That instead of choosing from the many which one, we just laugh that there's actually and really but none. But what does this mean in a practical sense, to argue a subject with no measurable test?

To me it means this, that no matter the clatter that in life will occur, when it's finished and done, no responsible party not present will mysteriously procure it's will or its plan or its comfort for sure. And we, knowing this, decide soberly to live out our lives in wealth and plenty of cheer with our fellow brethren for whom our wish to think as we do is but mere.

You may be comparing to a small laundry list, for you I should have but the minimum, you insist. "Is he working, stable career, does he get out of his house and clean behind the ear?” You could be wondering if I have a nice million or do I share a similar predilection for raising some children. Without the full list, our business is done, and this expansive fraction of time we are in will become but a gist.

.

In the meantime, I sit here, under the dome, of the starry night sky where I often might roam.

The view to the sky gives great wonder, but my dreams for an answer are put swiftly asunder, for answers from above are little but scant, so I ground my attention where I spy with my little brown eye something so verily telling and also verdant.

This thing that I see, that you too know of well, it fills up the fields that you lay in at night, gazing at stars, be wishing you might. Of the two types that exist, the majority is a variety that is shaped in a triple, these reveal nothing but utter and nonsensical dribble.

But amongst all the rubble, in this natural bubble, there is a particularly valuable complimentary kind that exists, that is familiar in structure, but rather does hold much more ephemeral muster. Luck gives its approval in the shape of quadruple.

As I bend down to the ground to pick from the mound this thing that I hope, out of all others alike, that it will be right, ‘fore the last thing I want is to leave from this field without anything to show for the night or my life. For all this reflection, I still won’t have any idea what I will have until closer inspection. Same goes for all, I wish luck to you too, and also adieu.

So while I lean over to pick up this clover to see if I have something special or only a plant, you are checking much similar for your need to quickly replant. While each of
us decides to contact the other, moreover, sadly it seems that our fraction is over.