I'm trying to learn piano. I don't have a knack for it. I'm not musically talented. It's choppy and I miss notes frequently. I just never know exactly where to put my fingers or when to do so. It seems to me to be a matter of knowledge and timing. I have little skill in either. I know what I know. But I don't know the right things. I can press keys ok, I've got that down pretty well. But they are rarely the right keys to make this thing called music. There actually is a right and a wrong way to do it. But it's odd, because no one can tell you what sounds will be music or not. You just know it when you hear it. 

Without natural talent, the only other option I have is practice. Which boils down to faking it by brute force. Not to be too dramatic, but I've got to eventually be able to convince people that what I'm doing is beautiful or else I'll die having accomplished nothing and lived a life of pain as a result. Nothing is worse than seeing the faces wrinkle at my feeble piano playing. A lower threshold of talent is required though to be able to play anything resembling music. After that you can learn anything. But if you don't have enough natural talent, there isn't really any hope. 

Most people, even though they won't admit it, don't like a piano player who is forcing it. Someone, as is apparent to the listener, who is mechanically shadowing what they think good music sounds like. This awareness of it being forced counteracts any musicality that is being produced otherwise and the net effect is harder to listen to than someone who is honestly bad at it. On the other hand, it might not be so apparent what is and isn't a product of practice vs talent. 

There are those who argue for more leniency in the music world. What is and is not considered music. They almost say anything is music, but there are those also who heartily disagree. Almost anyone can see this. If their intention is to allow people to play anything and feel good about it, then that is fine, but the message gets lost for people who appreciate real music. Which is almost everyone. Including those who advocate for more of a range. They know what is and isn't music, and they can't hide their reaction when someone is playing something they don't think qualifies, despite their attestation. 

This is an advanced type of piano play, where the player is doing things beyond what would appear to be normal but also achieving something akin to music for a certain audience. Some people just need to be encouraged, the hope being that things will come out in the wash and they will eventually fall in line with what is actually music. They just need to hear the possibility that anything can be beautiful. And then once they hear how beautiful that music is, they can replicate the real thing more naturally to the wider audience. 

Confidence is everything. In this line of thought, even more than talent. 

I'm starting slow, and I haven't gotten very far, but I'm building my confidence in playing the piano. It's gratifying in any case, and as long as that continues, I have no reason to stop. 

My main problem right now seems to be that I have an idea what sound should follow to make the music I want, but in the moment I have no godly idea what note or key I can press to make that sound properly. I freeze. I press no key. And in the instant of my pausing and thinking, I've lost the flow and need to start over. Lots of this.

Maybe one day I will have more knowledge of what notes cause what sounds so that I can just play what I want and it will be music. 

Apart from piano I want to get better at producing other types of beauty and music in other forms that will be pleasing to the ear.