I don't recognize myself. I don't recognize myself in the cashier, or the child, or the old man or woman. I don't recognize myself in the celebrities I follow, or the homeless people I walk past. I don't recognize myself in the billionaires or the people of the opposite political bent. I don't recognize myself in the stupid people around me or the geniuses doing smart things, both of whom I don't understand. I don't recognize myself in those I love. I love them precisely because they are not me. They are better than me and I do not see myself. I don't recognize myself in historical despots, or ancient people who did amazing things without our knowledge or technology. I don't recognize myself in speakers of a language I don't know. Or in those that think a thing I don't think, or believe a thing that can't possibly be true. I don't recognize myself in angry people, having a tantrum in a restaurant because the server is so stupid. Unlike them, I know the server does not get paid enough to care about their ketchup. I wish I could show this angry person the truth. I always know the truth all the time, good thing for me. 

I don't recognize myself in good people either. I strive to be like them, knowing that I am not them. I don't recognize myself in someone when they act wisely or in a mature way or patiently. I don't recognize myself in the parent of the screaming child in the grocery story. Simultaneously at fault for their child but also brave enough to endure all of our looks and subtle hatred in that moment. I don't recognize myself in my parents, both too incompetent to ever have had kids, but also just people whom I have a special affection for, for some reason. I don't recognize myself in teenagers, so smart and sure, knowing what we don't. I don't recognize the confidence in them to know that they are entering a world we know nothing about and that we couldn't possibly understand. 

I don't recognize myself in prehistoric people who lived in bands of dozens, fighting and clawing their way to their next meal through the dark nights around a fire, cradling their hungry, frail children along the way. I don't recognize that they, like myself, don't think their lives are all that bad comparatively. I don't recognize that they too are aware of people before them who could not build fires so easily, that they should not complain when sitting in front of a warm fire, knowing things could not easily get better than this.

I don't recognize myself in the fascist. So sure of their superiority. So sure of their truth. So righteous in their beliefs. I don't recognize their pain, or their ignorance, or their suffering. They have it pretty good as far as I can see. I don't recognize their sense of loss. I have never complained when I shouldn't. I have never thrown a tantrum about my ketchup. I have never gotten angry about anything that wasn't completely justified. I have never had a thought or a belief or acted in a way that wasn't in total cohesion with everyone who witnessed it. 

Everyone has been able to recognize themselves in me. They have all seen my side. They have felt what I have felt. They have seen what I have seen. They see themselves in me. They empathize with my pain. They see my suffering and feel the same pain. They get it. They get me. I know they do. I belong here. I feel what they feel when they feel what I feel. I feel loved when they show me that my beliefs are right. I feel love when they agree with me. I feel love when they understand me. And why wouldn't they? My beliefs are normal. 

And if you don't think my beliefs are right and normal. Then I don't recognize myself in you. 

I don't recognize myself in you. You can't see yourself. I can. I am writing this. I am admitting I can't recognize myself. You aren't. You hate what you don't understand. You love what is better than you. You love those less fortunate. You hate those who are wrong. You make fun of those who are different. Maybe not different colored clothes or skin. But you definitely hate those who think different things are right than you. You hate different morals. 

Now I recognize myself in you. I recognize your hate for me. I recognize your ability to see my mistake. I recognize you when you see my blind spot. I recognize the feeling that you know I am wrong about something. I recognize the hate for my hate. I recognize the recoil. I recognize the doubt.

The truth is I don't recognize myself in you. But I am desperate to. I want to see your world. I want to feel what you feel. I want to know what you know and learn from it. Learn to absorb it. Learn to be it. Learn to love it.

I want to recognize that you are me. That the cashier and the child and the old man and woman are me. That the despot and the fascist are myself. That the suffering ignorant prehistoric person is me in a different life. At a different time. In a different environment. 

I want to recognize that all humans who have ever lived are the same person. Lined up end to end, they are given a random number. Then shuffled so that the numbers are in order. The prehistoric person next to their sister next to someone from five hundred years ago next to the future fascist next to me. Each living their lives in their time with other people. Dying as they would. Waking in the next. Living, dying, repeating. The thread being sewn through each individual that will ever live.

I want to believe this. But I don't. This is woo woo nonsense. I've heard this before. This is reincarnation. I don't believe in that. I know what I believe. And it isn't this. I could never believe this. I pity whoever believes this. They are ignorant of the truth, blinded by their desires. Led astray. It's beliefs like this that make the world such an awful place.

Wherever I got this idea, I'm sorry I had it. Whoever inspired me to come up with such a crazy idea, I wish they would have spared me. 

Whoever they are, I don't recognize myself in them.