A thousand exploding suns. In a septillion simultaneous universes across the multiverse. Such awe. Much glory. So epic. Amazing. The words don't describe, they show. Both brilliant and nothing at the same time. The study of quantum physics is just one large thought experiment. There are no facts, only interpretations. The meeting of quantum physics and English literary analysis. A cherry on top of the proverbial circumference divided by the diameter of the circle of life. It's Simba meeting Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, a conversation that went unnoticed. A figment of the imagination that ended up being the most real thing about surfing. An ocean of meaning underneath the propagating waves that were just the surrogate for another experience. The truth behind the veil. The weight behind the stone. The thing that goes unsaid. The obvious cliche that was just a cover for a deeper truth that was unexpected. And only known to a few. What's a cover, what's a truth. If you directly say the truth is that a metaphor for something? Playing hot potato with your friends, those were the days.

The truth behind the veil. The wizard behind the curtain of truth. The bearded wise man behind the wizard. The fool behind the king. The fool behind the fool. A thousand exploding suns. In a multiverse. In a turkey. The unsolicited picture of a rooster. The harmless joke that starts a war. The sandwich that changed the world. The sandwich that was the beginning of the end. The way to lose an argument with one reference. The way to win without doing any work. The cheat. The liar. The loser who was given the participation trophy for threatening to destroy the world but instead caused everyone to freeze in place. The diversion that taught the real lesson. The example that carried more than the explanation. Here, catch. 

A thousand exploding suns that you carry in the palm of your hand. The man who sold the world. Or was it the unsuccessful  temptation in the desert? We don't know, how are we supposed to know? There are those who don't care. There are those that know enough not to pretend. There are those that don't want to communicate, that don't obsess over being understood. He had the reputation for truth. So they believed him. Now we believe in him. Or something. Or nothing. 

They all admitted to cutting down the cherry tree. They claimed to be free to do so. It was the parents who were the real liars, anyway, making it seem like they cared about the tree in the first place. They were probably happy they didn't need to hire someone to do it now. Having a kid who obsessed about the truth was the real loss. No one wanted a cherry tree. Have you ever eaten a cherry straight from a tree? It's disgusting. Try the apples, or the pomegranates. Any better? No wonder they took to farming. 

After a hundred thousand years of picking fruit and being sexually satisfied it was time to do something different, even if it meant more than a thousand years of famine and plague, over and over again till extinction. Today. It would eventually lead to tiktok, so it was worth it. And running water, I suppose. And people wouldn't die at thirty. I don't know, it might have been pretty nice to die at thirty after a short life of discomfort, or mainlined humanity, it's hard to tell which. Or a few days of torture. Especially considering where they were headed. Such sacrifice. Much debt relief. But we won't get that good of a deal, we still need to gamble with our lives. This is the rub, this is the trick happening before your very eyes. This is the pretend drama happening on the reality tv show that is real people anyway having real relationships constructed by the producers. The hand up the ass of the doll. The anthropomorphised collection of wood, wool and string, brought to life by another anthropomorphised collection of wood, wool and string. 

The end of the world must have happened in the twentieth century. Do the people born into the wasteland know how bad their lives are? They hear stories. But do they actually know? Are they that bad? Or is that just a story they tell themselves? A story we tell ourselves as entertainment? Or a story we tell ourselves to tell the truth to those who are listening for it? At the end of the nineteenth century things were being wrapped up. Policitally, scientifically, artistically. The invention of photography at just the right time to stir the pot. Lose some people some jobs to pave the way for a brave new world. The moral landscape no more. Take a picture. The movie that took imagination out of the book and showed it to everyone, but lost it immediately. The blue screen of death that was a placeholder for the horror show within that the average user couldn't comprehend. And wouldn't be useful to them anyway. 

The mirror held up to the witch’s face in that story about the evil step daughters. Or sisters, rather. Or daughter, singular. Sleeping beauty was the protagonist, so everything was from her point of view. And snow white's. I wonder if they will ever tell these stories again from the villain's point of view. Eve was framed. The switch happens and no one in the audience has any clue. But we don't talk about that. It's too complicated to explain anyway. Would probably be misunderstood. Or understood perfectly. Is there a difference? Too many things happening at once for anyone to follow. At least two things happening. Always at least two. 

Two sides to every story. Two sides to every coin. The binary language that changed the world and let people say there is no binary. Unlike the alternative, they were non conformists. The universal Turing machine built on at least one zero and one one that destroyed the world. Or created it, it's hard to know which. The endless levels of simulated worlds within worlds within at least one bubble in the cosmological multiverse duplicated across the quantum multiverse. Or is that backward? It's going in some direction but I honestly don't know which. The other side of the coin. The other coin. The other side of the metaphor. It's either a hierarchy of levels or it's a landscape of peaks and valleys. Peaks and troughs. Waves. Surfing. Meditation. Prayer. Story telling. Truth seeking. Garbage collecting. A thousand exploding suns.

Centuries ago, the story goes, the world was run by violence. Today it's run by words and non action. The blood bath is still happening but in everyone's minds instead of in the streets. There are at least eight things happening now. Not to say that people's fingers don't get pricked and bleed occasionally, or a lot. But I honestly know nothing of that world, so I write instead of fight. I write. I write.