There are a thousand exploding suns. It's beyond my comprehension. From the outside it is a wash of fire, heat and radiation. It happens in nanoseconds, but within, is an eternity. I feel every bit of it. 

I wish I had the words to describe it. I wish I had the knowledge to form a thought. I wish. I wish. But I don't get my wish. You see, I am a physicist. I should be able to comprehend what has happened. Well I can comprehend a bit of it, but not the whole thing. I will be destroyed before I really even know that it's happened. 

In the nanosecond of my destruction, let me take a second to tell you how we got here. 

I have been sent here against my will. It was a mistake. Probably mine if I'm being generous. But not really if I'm being honest.

The pressure of the fusion creating helium to iron and the resulting heat is more than I can take. The simplicity of the event is a mask for the complexity. Nothing can escape the terror unless you're thousands of light years away. Luckily, most of the universe is far away: it, generally, being a large place. But I'm here. Right here. Why was I so stupid?

Was it all a malicious lie? Or a game? It was entertaining to some I bet. Tragic to others. Others were indifferent. They watched on the sidelines while I gave it all away. They cried as they witnessed the horror they could not prevent. They reveled in the gullibility of someone who would take every opportunity to boast about himself, and said nothing. They thought highly of him and spoke in a language he didn't realize he didn't understand. As they watched him cavitate, and never gave him a reprieve.

But they did. They let this poor physicist have his project. They gave him funding, they listened to his lies. The kind that fool everybody. They had no power to stop it themselves.

I wanted the project to work. I wanted it to be different. But it wasn't up to me what it was. I did not intend for this. Doing too many things at once is how you get here. 

The nanosecond stretches out to the cosmic horizon. The one set by the speed of light. At about three hundred million meters per second, you can just about notice your own stupidity.

This was supposed to be good, but it's just turned into a deep sea expedition. It's where I started, the navy. It's where I am still. Three hundred million light years away from the savannahs where the first humans hunted gazelles grazing. The connection between them and me is not something I wish to tell directly. It's an old story. It's a well known and studied history. This is not about that. This is about a thousand exploding suns. 

In the nanosecond I have used up, the fire has already gone out. The aftermath of the tirade of the universe triggered by a child with his toys. 

That's it, I am burned up.