

I'm big into tennis. Well, that's not accurate, I'm stuck in a tennis court. Lots of courts, lots of players, locked doors. Eventually, I will get out of the court, but I don't really know when. I'm not allowed to leave on my own. I can't opt in to leaving, only when called. But the up side I can play as much tennis as I want, so that's good, since I'm so into tennis.

There are lots of different rackets to choose from, I can basically have any racket I want. This is apparently a perk of the court, but I'm honestly not impressed. What I'm more interested in are the sledge hammers lying all over the place. I'm not sure what their true purpose is, but they end up being abused by some players. Every once in a while someone will use a sledge hammer to knock out another player and they will have to be taken off the court. Lucky for them, I guess. Not always though, sometimes they get sledge hammered but they just break an arm or something, which will get better eventually, or not, doesn't really matter in the long run. Luckily for them (a different sort of luck) there are accommodations so they can still play tennis either way. There's nothing really else to do here but play tennis. There are some people not playing, but all the tennis players basically ignore them as best they can. 

Interestingly, the sledge hammers are used in another creative way. Some people use them to break down a door and escape. It actually works too. Sometimes. It's risky though. If other players see that you might do that, first, they just highly discourage it. Which is an interesting way to play I suppose, but it's just a predictable technique and not really all that interesting. If you manage to get to a door and start hammering (which isn't really that hard given everyone is busy playing thier own games) you basically need to succeed, finish, and just leave without being noticed. You definitely can't tell another player you want to or are going to do this. You can barely even discuss the fact that the sledge hammers can be used in this way. There are actually real annoying consequences. 

If you get caught in the act of banging on the door, or if you open it but don't fully exit, there are major fines and they make all your games after that be handicapped by a complicated point system so the outcomes of games essentially become rigged and fixed. You'll never win another game, and you'll essentially never have fun playing again. The weird part is, there isn't anything wrong with leaving the court in principle. People are allowed to leave all the time (as long as it's forced on you in some way and not a choice). Sure, if you leave, other players wish they could play with you still, but they are automatic winners in those games, so I'm not sure what the real problem is honestly. It's just a matter of when and why. 

An interesting other thing that happens is that people will walk up to the doors sometimes, with or without a hammer, sometimes trying to break it with their bare hands, which is impossible in practice. This style of play is highly mocked and parodied. The mocking style of play is, incidentally, a common technique of players who are moderately decent, but not great, at tennis.

Given all of this, this isn't even the worst part. I'm honestly fascinated with the dynamics of how people get out of the court, and generally annoyed that I can't leave, but I'm working on my tennis game in the meantime. Like I said, I'm big into tennis. 

The worst part is that while I can essentially play as much tennis as I want, which is great, I am consistently having to server the ball to start a game. Then, if you can believe it, they hardly even hit the ball back. I could maybe go two or three volleys and then they miss it completely or just decide to stop the game for some reason. It's incredibly annoying. I never get asked to play or get to respond to a served ball, I honestly have no idea how to play that aspect of the game because it's never happened. Maybe once or twice if I'm being generous. And if I'm being totally honest, I'm terrible at it. Not enough practice. I always miss the return and then whomever I'm playing with won't serve again. They won't even really want to return either if I serve once I've missed their serve. If I don't play the way they want to play, they won't play with me. Not even talking about how I want to play. 

This is the really funny part about this court. No one seems to be playing all that well, or all that long in particular games. They all go one or two volleys and that's it. Of course, there are lots of players who got good soon after they joined the court and have been playing the same games with the same people the whole time, but the vast majority of us, especially at this stage of the history of the court, are not getting to play good, interesting, or drawn out games.

Its almost like I'm one of the few people even trying to play these types of games. If youre not in the class of players who were good and talented from the start there is really no hope of playing good tennis or getting good at it. The people in my class of tennis (anyone I'm really eligible to play with) don't really want to play good tennis. They won't just come out and say it either. They will make it seem like they want to develop their game, but then they will intentionally miss the ball or make some excuse why they cant play anymore. Im not even able to blame them, they make it all so reasonable. They are all experts at this style of play. There are millions of players like this. 

It's really an illusion that this court is designed to develop the game at all, or to develop players' skill. Everyone talks about how that's what we're all doing: getting better at tennis. Learning new ways to play. Developing better rackets. Better techniques at forehand, backhand, serving, returning. But frankly it seems more accurate to say that the first couple players on the court figured it all out, they developed the game as much as possible, they worked out all the rules, techniques, styles, and point systems. 

In reality, they are playing their own internal games in their heads that happen to manifest as what I see as a tennis. My deeper suspicion is that they are all probably wondering why I keep throwing balls at them. 

I honestly wish this space could be used for other games, other than tennis. But this space is so crowded and the idea of tennis is so pervasive. Everyone talks about tennis regardless of what's going on in their head. Also, frankly, it's almost like any other games we could come up with would just be other forms of tennis at their core. As a collection of players in a court that we cannot choose to leave, tennis is all that we have. 

So all I can do is play tennis. And all I can do is continue to serve, to start games with people. If they are game to play, that's a great time, and I actually enjoy tennis in all fairness, when I actually get to play. 

There's a lot of waiting around between games though. 





