The following is paraphrasing a line from an episode of a television show produced in the first two decades of the 21st century called "Boardwalk Empire."

"Boardwalk Empire" is a period piece. (That is to say that is does not take place in the same time period in which it was produced. It represents the past, specifically.) The show is about the American "Prohibition" in which the country saw the rise of organized crime as a result of society leaning in the direction of making laws that made the possession, consumption, production, and sale of alcohol illegal for any citizen of the United States, regardless of age, race, creed, or intent.

The following story is given by a Catholic priest in a private discussion between him and a single woman in a public place. Both characters are recurring members of the long-standing cast of the show, the woman being given more attention than the priest, who is only a side character, at least at the point in the show from which this story is paraphrasing. Both characters themselves are side characters to the central lines of story-telling of the show. Not much else is known by the author of this piece about the show, except that it ran for several seasons, and is no longer in production at this time.

Here is the story.

.

"There is a feast. There is a table, and everyone is trying to eat. There is plenty of food, but not everyone can eat. There are utensils: spoons, which can be used to eat. There is no other way to eat. Some of the people are starving, and others are plentifully fed. The important thing to mention about the spoons is that they are longer than the arms of the people trying to use them: there can be no food supplied to a handler of a spoon, simply because the angle of the spoon against the arm placed in a position to reach the mouth will place the end of the spoon past the point of the mouth, so that no one can eat from the spoon with which they attempt to feed themselves. But still people are fed. As the starving attempt to reach one end of the spoon with their mouths, while their hand or hands is at the opposite end, they will ultimately fail to feed themselves, and they are said to be forever in misery as they can not contemplate a way to find sustenance. Which they need. The people who are fed are said to be satisfied, happy, and content."


According to the written and spoken words from the show, the man described above gives the answer to the riddle—how some are fed at this feast, with it’s limited utensils by which to obtain food—as a simple single sentence answer:

"Those that can eat, while they cannot feed themselves with the spoons in their hands, are still eating from spoons, which are held by other people on the opposite end. It turns out that to be content at this meal, you cannot feed yourself: those in ‘Hell’ are starving from the failure to feed themselves, and those in ‘Heaven’ are feeding each other."

.

In analysis, we can say a few things. Everyone is at the same table, and they can presumably see each other. Again, there is plenty of food, but this table lacks the proper tools. What tools are available are insufficient to allow a single person to eat by themselves. Those that are in "Hell" are starving because they cannot feed themselves with the spoons too long for their arms. Those that are in "Heaven" are happily content with the situation of feeding each other from across the table, or from long distances, with the spoons available that can reach from one person to another without a problem.


Unlike the conventional view of heaven and hell (two separate locations, one with clouds and God, and the other with burning souls at the bidding of an evil Devil), this scenario places people squarely at the center of their own misery or delight. Whoever is hosting this meal is absent: neither God nor the Devil exists at this table or in this story. People: their intelligence, their morality, and their choices, are the full extent of the separation between those in "Heaven" and those in "Hell."

This story is good in the sense that, while it is given by a Catholic priest, it goes against the grain very much so by removing the external agents for the delight or misery of those subject to the mechanism, placing people at the center of it, and providing ways in which people cause their own fate by the choices they make. It completely removes judgement from the scenario and even allows for the possibility for people to change sides at this table: sometimes trying to feed themselves and failing, thus being in "Hell," while other times feeding and being fed by others, thus being in "Heaven," all while at the same meal.

It is balanced, in that it puts people in the same scenario with the same tools for easily understandable motivations: to eat and be merry. There are restrictions that are necessary to drive the moral balance in one direction rather than the other.

There are several problems with the story as well, which are never explained by the priest. It ultimately remains to be seen what the purpose is of this scenario, as given in the context of the show, except to be an explanation of an aspect of faith, of which the priest is presumably an expert, and the woman is presumably in some need of.

.

Ultimately, the central intent of this piece is to ask the question (and attempt to provide an answer) about whether this story of the afterlife makes any sense. Additionally, is it possible to construct a better allegory for what a life after this one could constitute in order to fulfill all the requirements of the classical image of what the afterlife, from the Catholic perspective, must have in order to continue the story of religion successfully. Because, folks, let’s not be coy here. Religion is not going anywhere anytime soon.


So, to recap the current situation of this piece, let’s remind ourselves of a few things that need to be true for any of this to make sense.

#

The afterlife exists

There are two opposing situations for any given person who was alive of which to be a part

There must be some visual scene placed in the context of the old world, to represent the situation of the people in the new world, that follows the rules of the old world, but that somehow explains the circumstances of the new world indirectly

#

The situation should be a close enough approximation to the reality that we know so that there are no so called "holes in the plot" that would reveal the weakness of the allegory and thereby betray the purported reality that the afterlife does not exist, or at least that it cannot be described within the context of the real world.

Looking at this story in detail, we see that the people in it are already at the meal. The story does not include any mechanism for their arrival, intention, or knowledge of the event that they are participating in. No information is given about who provides the space, table, food, utensils, or even the very people at the heart of the matter. There is no information given directly about any sights or sounds, beyond that implication that the people must be able to see what they’re doing. There is no necessity for speech at this table, but it may be helpful.

Furthermore, there are some specific problems with the scenario. A lot of the mechanisms for the guests plight or merriment are not provided. Other than to say that those that eat are "happy" and those that starve are "sad."

Looking at those mechanisms in detail, we can see that the people at the table are restricted to only be able to eat from one end of a spoon. And they somehow are restricted or not smart enough to hold the spoon from any other place than the opposite extreme than the place from which they eat. These people do not, for some reason, hold the spoon near the bowl end, letting the rest of the long spoon to fly around the table, feeding themselves successfully, while also increasing the potential of the spoon to knock people in the head and body as they hungrily stuff food into their mouths. More importantly, why don’t people just eat with their hands?

Do they ever run out of food? Are there any other unspoken people in this space, whose sole purpose is to replenish the meal from some other external source, who could or could not be eating themselves by some unspoken mechanism. Additionally, it could be supposed whether the food is any good, why people need to feed themselves in the afterlife at all, is there another fatal consequence in this world if no food can be obtained over a certain period, and does it really cause pleasure to eat in the first place. It goes without saying, that there are no other locations in this allegory and there are apparently no consequences, or for simplicity, "effects," that result from eating except the pure unadulterated pleasure that would normally be attributed to the full accepted presence of the raw deity Himself. In other words, people no not become obese, get sick, or have allergies (which would all be negative consequences from eating) and they do not emaciate, get sick, physically weaken, or die again from the lack thereof.

This is not entirely true. There is nothing in the story that would prevent someone from dangerously losing weight or becoming so physically weak as to no longer be able to handle a spoon for their misery or other’s pleasure. Furthermore, it is implied, that if you feed someone, you will be fed by another, so that if you are smart enough not to try to feed yourself, you will be rewarded by receiving food at the end of a spoon which is being manipulated by another who is presumably being fed by another, and so on. The world of this story is split along moral lines: there are "good" people, and there are "bad" people. It does not, in any way, expressly dictate the quantity of the number of people at the feast, but it implies it.

.

We can infer that there must be at least three people at this table. At least two people to experience mutual consumption, and at least one other person to be attempting to feed themselves and failing miserably. This of course is an assumption, but it is a good one, because this story’s intent is to explain "Heaven" and "Hell," so it is safe to assume that both situations exist, within the context of the story. For it would make no sense to set up the entire scenario, and then give the all too convenient fact that one of the sides of the coin does not exist.

The two who are feeding themselves cannot feed the other. This would violate the precepts of the allegory entirely. The source of quality implied directly by the original story, is receiving food by some means.


However, it does not preclude a scenario in which the starving person contributes to the meal of one or both the other two and receives nothing in return. If the starving person is feeding the other two but starving themselves, the fundamental assumption of this scene—that those that are being fed are "good" and those that are starving are "bad"—is brought into question.

What this "Heaven and Hell" story, ultimately speaks to is the difference between being selfish and giving to others. It says that "if you give to others, you are in ‘Heaven,’ have a soul of ‘good quality,’ and if you only try to serve yourself, you have a soul of ‘poor quality’ and as a result are in ‘Hell.’

If the two who are feeding themselves and being fed by a third without providing anything in return, it begs the question of where the true quality lies. For one thing, it implies a preference by at least one or both of those in "Heaven." From any given person’s perspective in the minimum conditions, each person sees two other people beyond themselves. Of the two people in "Heaven," they are each choosing to feed only one of the other people, and patently ignoring the other. For some unknown reason, and this directly implies that this person making this choice is either not seeing or unable to feed the other (of which no mechanism for this possibly is present in the original telling), or more likely, they are not as "good of a soul" as the story intends to make them out to be. Additionally, it can be clearly seen that if the starving person is contributing to the happiness of any of the other two and not even attempting to feed themselves (which may not be true but is not a possibility restricted by the story given as is) then it could say a lot about that single person and their quality.

The story, it seems, can be flipped on its head. And what’s interesting is that none of the obvious physical plot holes need to be invoked in order to do this.

Those plot holes can be invoked, for the sake of closure, to say that the starving person could be feeding one or both other people at the table with one hand, while feeding themselves with the other. Thereby putting everyone in "Heaven" to the understanding of what that means. All three of the individuals at the table could be trying to feed themselves, which could reduce the minimum at the table to one, and put everyone in "Hell."

It is also possible to say that feeding others may not be mutual or reciprocal. One of the people in "Heaven" may not be being fed, which would then imply that the pleasure of "Heaven" does not come from food itself, but rather simply the act of giving. However, this is unlikely, for the only reason food is used in this scenario is to tie the lack of feeling hungry with the pleasure of "Heaven." If the allegory wished to make it about giving only, then they would not be at a feast, but rather would just being passing inanimate, ultimately worthless, tokens to each other by some mechanism that would preclude a person from gathering tokens and keeping them for themselves.

This is not true either. It would be very possible in this new scenario to gather tokens by some mechanism (we know the people at the table are "human" so they presumably have arms, and mouths). By giving to yourself, because the implication of "Heaven" would now be philanthropy, gathering and holding onto these inanimate tokens still would not provide any source of moral high ground, however it would provide some pleasure, and would still separate out the "good ones" from the "bad ones." In this consideration, the presence of "pleasure" is brought into question and its relationship to "morality." Because the tokens and the people (other than the table and supposedly some chairs) are the only thing that exist, they must carry inherent value; if the tokens were used to represent the inherent or implied value of other things, then the tokens themselves would not have to but still could hold inherent value.

.

There is an aspect of the food example that has not been addressed. Namely: "manipulation."

Let’s take only the scenario of the two mutually feeding individuals, and put aside for the moment, the person starving, for the sake of simplicity. Let’s say that both are eating, because they are mutually feeding the other. It’s a perfect balance. The quality of this scenario is receiving food, and by implication, another quality of the scenario is giving to another. Because they are both mutually feeding each other, we are not saying that one is feeding the other while they themselves are starving. If we were to say that, then the quality of this world would be reduced expressly to the act of eating and would forgo the philanthropy aspect entirely. Because this discussion is about manipulation, it is possible and advantageous to consider this arrangement because it isolates the true intention at the crux of this story.

Let’s say, for the sake of argument, that this story is not about giving at all, but rather is about the ability to manipulate others into giving to you. Let’s be clear by pointing out that this continues to flip the qualifications of the example in the opposite direction in the sense that if you are manipulating the situation to your advantage so that you are being fed in the first place, then that would not be considered a "good" quality at all, but rather you would be the selfish one. Again, this doesn’t preclude the selfish one from feeding others, but that point, because this is about manipulation, they turn into victims and not perpetrators of their "goodness," and instead of giving, are having things taken from them. Furthermore, it is possible to point out that being a victim may be an honorable way to go about it. Which clearly makes the case that if the selfish one were not being the victim of manipulation but only the perpetrator of it, then there is nothing redeeming about their character and therefore continues to flip the "Heaven"-"Hell" sides.

As the author sees it, to keep a slight attention to the score, there are more ways to flip this scenario on its head than there are ways to defend the original single view that "Heaven" is good and "Hell" bad.

.

But let’s consider an alternative. Is it possible to come up with a scenario that could maintain the proper balance between "Heaven" and "Hell," and if so, what would that look like?

These questions must be considered in reverse order, first presenting one or more possible visual stories that could be surrogates for the one already given, then the first question would be answered by implication, if the result is even in the original speaker’s favor: the priest trying to explain "Heaven" and "Hell" in an understandable way to a person in need of some knowledge. Then we would have succeeded in our attempt, and if not (if the analysis of such a scenario reveals that the situation can continue to be flipped in the same way as already demonstrated, then we would be failing to meet the intentions of the priest, and all hope is unfortunately lost).


Obviously, this is only one attempt at an alternative, and within the lifetime of the universe, there can be many attempts. However, the number of attempts must be finite if the laws of nature continue to hold as understood as best as they can be today. Namely, that the universe is subject to a thing called "time," time has an extent, and that this thing is itself finite in that extent. What the words "finite" and "extent" mean, must be taken at face value, and will not be given here. Other than to give the hints that "finite" is the opposite of "infinite," in the tautological sense, at least, and "extent" refers to some "distance" over some conceptual "dimension." It’s easy to see how the process of defining words only continues the problem of introducing more "words" that have a need themselves be defined. So, for the sake of brevity, let’s point out the obvious problem of "infinite regression," not worry about it, stick with our reliance on external sources of information, and move the fuck on.


So, given all these things, let’s give it our best shot to present an alternative to the feast story of "Heaven and Hell" that tends less to be flipped along moral lines. If possible.

.

The new scenario is given in part two of this piece.
