I think through a thought till I’m through it, though thinking about it, I know that I don’t. I think through a thought till I’m thrown to a new one and then I think through that one till the next.

I think till it hurts, I think till I sleep, I think and I think, there’s little relief. Thoughts drip from my brain down into a bowl or a vase or a dish or a holder of sorts; they secrete from my brain like I might write them on paper, filling worlds upon worlds with an idea or a caper.

These wisps of a thought flow out of my brain down the side of my neck and across to the apex where my arms meet my core. From there they are drawn like sap from a tree, ever so slowly and perfectly unforced, down the length of my upper and fore through my wrist. Finally they flow out my own finger tips through a special device for such sucking and into the dish. Like a thought and a hand and a pen and a page.

Once in the dish, the thought can go through its own evolution to become something new. Or something the same, depending on your view. It changes perspective from viewer to viewer, but be quiet now, for what you really see: not even a whisper.

Looking now at the world I have made in the vase, after an interval I see that it’s a wide open space. It sprawls and spans and has far reaching lands. And people-like things to roam them in clans. Familiar to me are these microbial beings, they walk on two legs and have faces of sorts, but what relates them to me, actually, is that they huddle together in the vast void of the world of the vase I have made in my haste.

I took no time to make their world proper, no shelter or safety or explanation to sunder their fears or their wants or their questions of wonder. I gave no seminars on how to treat one another, no guidance was offered to one that the other is their brother. I made sure not to put much thought into it, while I was siphoning off my own pain in a respite. For that, no time did I have to design the world right, so the world on the inside not confirmed by the sight. I might have done both but botched it for sure, if I’d even known it was happening when I was getting my cure. No question remains that these beings have needs, ones of philosophy, morality and of course simple necessity. It appears though quite clear, that in my absent world building I’ve only made for these people a huge mystery.

.

I sit back in my chair away from this creation of mine and relax with a pipe and go for a dine. While I’m out in the world amongst the people I see, happy go-lucky they all seem to be. I think through the thoughts that I have now anew and ponder the circumstance that exists happenstance about which to do I have no godly clue.

I was only serving myself when I relieved my thoughts into that vase, that became such a wide open space with its own population that huddles with such familiarization. I intended never to make a world of its own, or some beings that have needs of their own. Furthermore, how am I even to go about aiding, saying I wanted to do so at all, those poor souls wandering around in there with questionable faces.

Who’s place is it of mine to determine anything for them, my chance to affect what I’ve done is a little too late. I cannot help them or guide them at all, for obviously ‘who am I?’ Not divine, that’s for sure, which means authority none do I have when it comes to another mans’s fate.

No, I resolve, I must let it be what it is. They must fend for themselves and learn as we did. Fighting and clawing and killing their way to the place we have now so safe from the dangers and filled with morality and all things society. Where, from our perch, we know right from wrong, we have the experience to know what to do, as I’m doing now, just going along.

On my way back, the morning is nigh. I stroll the streets casually and crane up at the majesty of the starry night sky. I look up at this sight and I wonder again if those primitive men in my vase back at home see something similar that my ancestors saw then. It occurs to me possibly my flat ceiling be not the most majestic of visages. Also the fact that I know nothing of anything of their actual existences. They could exist in another place not in my vase whatever the case that might not so happen to be prim to the rim. As eager as I may be to give a lecture on the spontaneous creation of life as I see it, all I know and I think is only conjecture.

And that's the worse part, not knowing what's real, when I opened this cavity to the world and let out the surreal. Knowing something for certain would give me reprieve and relieve this enormity for which I wished not to achieve.

.

As I near my safe home after a long thorough night, I think one more thought that I wish I did not. If ever a thought to be thought through the end, this was not one of them, for it is a bend. It circles back on itself in the most deceiving of ways and makes you think progress when only static it stays. This thought will stay with me throughout all of my life as it passes me by on a clear starry night. Would I to take back the thought in my head, that I never have thought it, stayed ignorant instead.

The thought, I give warning, do not dally with it. Move along quickly do not try to sift it, of anything valuable, none to be had, but ruin and madness all to be found, while life happens anyway without you anywhere around.

This is the thought, that I wonder myself way deep down inside, in the dungeon keep of things that I won’t let another soul see but a peep. I think on the nature that I myself occupy and what mistaken and bumbling accidental happening caused it to be created so carelessly. And who, if any, is the fool who dripped from his brain to the page, out of pain or other terrifying singular thing, the whole world as we know it from the teeming about to the ‘let’s have a night out’. Not to mention, that fool in his self centered reverie, is the reason for my own certain identity, that I now am in such a similar vice with a world of my own to think on, once, twice, thrice.

.

Back at home as the time passes, I ignore with dismay the container hidden away in my study, but my thoughts receive no allay.  All containers to think of a cover are given, this flat and its predilection for spontaneous creation, me also in it, still must be lived in. I must manage to not open my thoughts or drop even a wisp, worried it falls to the floor and develops a lisp. I find myself frequently with familiar urgency to relieve the incumbency of my unending mind and its overabundant imagery. I wish to refrain the mishap of late, to avoid the divinity I apparently chased, so I remove or destroy those still in my place, and made my apartment completely un-vased.

I think till it hurts, and I think till I sleep. I think and I think, and I’m bound to repeat. I think more and more, my conflict replete, of the world that I made that sits in my study and is no much more larger than the size of my feet. What progress is made, in that place in the vase, the people evolving in a similar way to the way that my ancestors reversed moral decay. Or maybe more morbidly, I wonder or wish, whether perhaps those like-chaps did not make it at all, but instead surely crumbled to rubble, and fell from that perch that I sit now here under, and are only just ash. So I think and I think with this vase in my place, and freedom from all this morality being all that I yearn. I think that they best situation for all, when all said and done, I go back to that vase and find but an urn.

But the joy this morbidity brings me lasts not, I know without doubt that those chaps made it out of the void they were in when I last checked in. This fact, comes to mind, and does not so remind that I’m free of the binding in any such way of the wrapping and bounding of the tightening wound knot.

I have a lot to ponder these days, and while I’d wished I’d had more resolve to resist the prospect of unclenching my fist, I know that I don’t and it’s a matter of time until the urge for my thoughts to just purge to the page overcomes my resolve to stay but absolved. So I begin to casually scour my place, reluctantly so because I so much nice, don’t go and think that I'm eager to know what it’s like to mistake again twice. But try as I might I’m not reluctant for long, I have begun to give chase and now I am looking to replace what I so fervently removed from my flat with such haste. But none can be found, not a single empty one can be discovered throughout, and it seems that my panic has been given a bound, failure it seems, occasionally so, does assist you sometimes and indeed does help out.

On a nice day weeks from now, when all is forgotten, the tension of such moral dilemma from those nights has erased and is replaced by only pain too familiar of thinking endlessly on, I leave my flat on a mission. You see, since not a single one could be found anywhere in my place, and the regret is all but completely defaced, I go out to purchase a new very large vase.