Evolution is a subject known commonly to most people these days without having much of a science background, it's generally in the public consciousness. For the experts, its been known to us for roughly 160 years, and in that time, as it has been disseminated to the public, it's been a subtle misunderstanding between what the experts say, what they mean, what they know about relationship, and the unknown reasons they won't clarify the truth to the public better. All of this goes back to the beginning. Now, I don't blame Charles Darwin for getting a few things about the process inaccurate. If he felt like he wanted to frame certain aspects of the process certain ways because of his predilections, then I can't blame him for that in the time he lived. I do feel, however, that today's scientists should have modified the theory's language to improve how people understand things in today's modern thinking. I don't think there is anything new to discover about the theory, but I think a modern refurbishment of the language is called for, especially in light of what ended up happening (more on that later). All I'm offering is to align new language with a novel interpretation of the theory, which will make the theory more clearly understandable, and so no interpreting between the language and the theory is required. All of this might not seem like a big deal, just a bunch of language swapping from here to there, but there are a few implications from all of this that reach pretty far. We'll get to all that.


I wrote about evolution in my "Extraterrestrial Life" piece, but I thought it deserved it's own attention. So here we'll both cover what was said in the other piece, for consistency, as well as get into some related implications. Evolution is a deep enough subject for an evolutionary biologist with enough of a specialty to fill volumes, but we won't need to do that here to cover what I think is important. In fact I think evolution is a rather simple topic and can truly be fully understood without much detailed chemistry or genetics as the evolutionary biologists would generally have you believe. I think what they are doing is over analyzing and over doing chemical and genetic scientific studies and drawing abstract results that they will never be able to pin down so that their study ultimately comes to nothing but a lot of fancy chemistry, genetics, and statistics that says little about reality. The process of evolution is a macro process, and these scientists are attempting to apply micro scientific theories to the progression of chemicals and genes, and it simply doesn't make any sense. So beyond all the wasted evolutionary chemical and genetic research that goes on everyday, evolution as a macro process discussed in public by the experts and thereby taught to and understood by the public, there remains a blinding misconception.


The misconception about evolution is of a quality you've probably never even associated with it at all. To understand the misconception, let's first talk about processes in general. Processes, actions, mechanisms, etc. can be categorized as either "active," where it would require an agent or actor to progress the process, or "passive," where it runs or operates automatically, without an agent or actor, by superseding laws, like those of physics. An example of an active process is hitting a home run, it requires a player to hit the ball (note, the agent doesn't have to be human). If it's passive, then the process is automatic, and is governed by some other set of forces, like gravity, a planet moving in its orbit is an example of a passive process.


In it's simplest form, the theory of Evolution, has been quoted like this since its inception: "evolution of species by natural selection." What is meant by this is that organisms with traits that give them an advantage in the environment survive, thus pass on their genes to subsequent generations, which is that they are then said to have undergone "natural selection." This is a very forgiving way of putting it. This makes it sound pretty active, as if there is something selecting organisms for survival based on advantageous traits. There's a more common way evolutionary biologist's have put it to the public in many forums that make it sound even more active, they abbreviate it so egregiously they may be single handedly responsibly for an entire religious movement that has little sight of going away anytime soon (more on this later). They say something like "organisms with traits that give them an advantage in the environment are selected for survival." This is a declaration of an active process. This is even worse, it's more common, and it makes it sound even more active. The sentence is literally in the active voice. Whether the experts believe it's an active process or not comes down to their understanding of the word "selected." Frankly, it's hard to know the hearts as minds of the experts as well as it is of the public. So in this piece, I am openly speculating on what the experts believe about the truths of Evolution, I can only hope that despite incorrect wording, they interpret it properly. Ultimately, the word "selection" needs to be removed from Evolutionary science. But, before getting into more on that, first an important reason why all of this matters so much.

.

There's a particular Christian movement you might have heard frequently about that competes with Evolution on what seems to be an equal footing. It is, of the two "theories" that Christianity has at it's disposal (the other being Creationism, of which this one at least attempts to make sense), Christianity's best explanation for the origin, present day state of all of life, and how one got to the other. Originally, Creationism had no competition, it was not challenged in any circles that God instantly created all of life, including human beings in the current state they are today, and everything has been static for all of time. Then Charles Darwin published the "Origin of Species," and everything sorta.... changed. Not immediately. The Church was not as harsh on Charles Darwin as they had been on Galileo 150 years earlier. But as religious groups began trying to deal with the new science of Evolution, they needed to figure out how to keep people from believing that life happened without the need of God's intervention, and back to believing in God's Divine Will being at the heart of the existence of life. As the theory was studied through the decades, both secular and religious alike, the phrase "natural selection" was studied by both biologists in the field, secular members of the public, and religious members of the church. This is where it get's screwed up. Evolutionary biologists understand that there's a fair bit of interpretation required to get from "natural selection" to what is actually meant by the theory, where no action is meant in the real theory. Outside of this group, I doubt anyone of consequence knows this. Even when evolutionary biologists talk in the media today, they don't seem to make it clear that "natural selection" doesn't refer to any action, that Evolution is not an active process, or anything close to it. So the religious groups decided simply to take the phrase literally, interpret "natural selection" in an active sense, and all of a sudden there is a huge hole in the theory of Evolution to plop in an acting Agent to be doing all the choosing and selecting that the phrase "natural selection" is apparently referring to.


This theory, with an agent at the heart of the Evolution process, making decisions, is called Intelligent Design. It's Intelligent Designer, God himself, is deciding between what is advantageous and disadvantageous in the environment, and thus, what will survive and pass on it's genes and what won't. The Intelligent Designer is therefore guiding the Evolution process according to what He desires and what He has as an outcome, according to his grand plan, like, for example, to have human beings be the "end result" of Evolution. Being a Christian theory, it maintains the idea that Man is created in God's image. Intelligent design holds that humans beings are a "goal," that the Designer was working towards us throughout all of time. Intelligent Design is thought of, in religious circles, as the method by which God created the life we see around us, including ourselves. This is one of the claims of the Intelligent Design theory. Intelligent Design is not a competitor with Creationism, it is intended to be consistent. In fact, Intelligent Design is intended to be as consistent with Evolution as possible as well, at least from a evidentiary point of view. Intelligent Design intends to work with the same set of facts of life that Evolution works with, and simply offer an explanation of what those facts are that fits Christian beliefs more than the total secular theory of Evolution which was completely absent of God. However, the actual theory of Evolution is a bit different. Evolution contends that we are simply a member of a vast evolutionary bush or tree of different species, that has grown, flourished, and split trillions of times and created trillions of varied species. According to Evolution, none of it was guided or intended. Evolution is not an optimization routine by nature. The Human is not an optimized species in a general, even though we have no competitor in the animal world anymore. What's interesting is that the Christians built there Intelligent Design theory on the back of Evolution itself. It depends on it. Without Evolution, there would be no Intelligent Design. Christians don't have enough scientific wherewithal to be able to stand up their own theory to compete with Evolution on it's own. Intelligent Design works by taking advantage of a common misconception of Evolution, and they have been successful mostly because of the general public's misunderstanding of Evolution due to the same misconception. So if the general public were to become more educated with regard to Evolution, and the misconception were to be erased, then Intelligent Design would suddenly find itself unable to keep an argument above water.


If evolution had been spoken about as it properly, in the passive way, then there would have been no space for Intelligent Design to create a role for an Agent to make decisions and exercise His Will. No religious theory could have formed, if this had been the case. Personally, that makes this misconception all that more aggravating. It could have been so simple. All we had to do was be accurate about the theory an not cause a misconception. That shouldn't be that hard should it? Well, it's hard to dig your way out of the misconception hole with a phrase like "natural selection" when it doesn't actually do anything close to that. The misunderstanding is saturated into nearly all of the general public, go up to anyone on the street and they will at some level believe there is some active thing happening in Evolution, and it's plainly the fault of the actual scientists themselves. What's worse, as a result of the misconception, Intelligent Design gains easy followers because people in general find it easy to understand things in terms of agency. Whenever things are framed in an active sense, they become easier for people to digest. So Intelligent Design gets to offer it's easily believable fallacies and successfully confuses the public discussion in a larger sense. People who subscribe to Intelligent Designer actively campaign their beliefs using arguments that regular people on the street can't rebuttal easily. These arguments sound self evident, and it sounds like Intelligent Design has the self evident answer to the problem, one that no theory of Evolution could come close to answering. They make people question their own thinking on the topic, wonder if Intelligent Design philosophy is correct, and as a result question conventional science in general as well. It's remarkably easy to do, in fact.

.

They get someone talking and then start questioning them about how to evolve a human eye. The person will, being strong believers in Darwin Evolutionists, think it's obvious. The Host's first, main question (they think this is they're checkmate) is how do you get something so complex and intricate from something so macro and dull like evolution (they think). The person attempts to begin to explain, but approaches it the wrong way, coming at it from a story/evolution of features perspective, and they quickly realize they don't know the inner parts of the human eye all that well, and it's probably a bit more complicated if they did anyway. Couple this with the Intelligent Design Host asking questions every 5 seconds not letting the poor guy get a thought out. Dismantling any attempt he had at building a case. Ultimately the Host convinces that it's impossible to get a human eye, that it's too complex and specifically functional, you would need to design it, that evolution is too random and macro of a process to build something as specific as an eye. And the guy walks away questioning most of his Evolution beliefs. I've seen this supposed turn of beliefs happen in real time. Now, I know, don't believe everything you see on the Internet, the guy could have been a plant, he might have been a believer in Intelligent Design all along. But still it makes you think what's possible.


Either way, the reality about the human eye is this, so if you're ever approached by anyone of the Intelligent Design flavor and they want you to explain to them how the human eye could have been evolved without a designer, here's your answer. It's rather simple. They claim that the Intelligent Designer is required to add features and put them in the right place. And that evolution can't do that. That's they're claim. We'll welcome to wrong world. Flat wrong world, so there's not much room. It all comes down to mutations. Say we have a population of amoebas with simple light reacting cells. Every generation, during reproduction, because the chemistry isn't perfect over the millions of base-pairs in the DNA that need to be copied, there are some mistakes made, and some of the base-pairs are mutated (randomly changed). It's just probabilistic imperfection over millions of chemical reactions, nothing special about it, not special to the evolution process, it's just normal chemistry. Well, what you probably never thought about those mutations is that they're essentially adding information (complexity, novelty, that eventually become features) into the gene pool. If our genes didn't mutate, the population would just keep passing around the same genes and there would be no new information to evolve anything into. No mutation, no evolution. But anyway, we're injecting information into the population of amoebas and it's very simple set of cells can start gaining more features. Or the population gains two or three different features to it's light reacting cells. Then through the lifetime, some features allowed better survival then others. And then the next generation gets another mutation (read: additional complexity, another feature, especially at the simple cell organism level the growth would be high). With every generation, the complexity is increased.

#

So how did the eye get so complex?

Mutation equals new information in the DNA, so then it's complex simply because of millions of mutations over millions of years.

How does eye get designed without designer?

Some features benefit organism, lives, genes stay in pool: "add"

Some features detriment organism, dies, genes leave pool: "remove"

Add and Remove results are what "design" the eye

#

This is the process to get a complex thing like the eye, and it's completely passive too, it just happens. There was no need for a designer or watchmaker. The key thing that I think is beyond most people who consider Evolution is how important mutations are to the process. I've done work in the Computer Science field called Evolutionary Algorithms where you model software on biological evolution. In an evolutionary algorithm, you write code for individuals, and generations, and DNA, reproduction, etc. and during the reproduction process for every generation, there is a step where you need to "mutate" the DNA of all the individuals for that generation in question before proceeding. Now the purpose of these types of programs is to find an optimum solution that has a lot of factors that would otherwise be too complex to keep track of. So encoding the problem into an array of DNA terms and then running your evolutionary algorithm with your DNA against your particular environment where the DNA is decoded and then recoded every cycle, what you get is an optimum solution to your problem after ever-so-many thousand or so generations, depending on the problem. But here's the kicker. If you skip the mutation step in the algorithm so that the DNA is never mutated at any point from generation to generation. You could run it for a million generations, and you'll never optimize. It won't get much closer to optimum than 10% closer from the random performance point from which you started (which is highly likely to be very poor). And there's a simple explanation for this. Reproduction swaps DNA genes between parents to create children. So essentially the next generation is a group of individuals with the DNA of their parents all passed/mixed between them. To generalize that statement, you would say that cycling through generations is just passing around genes among the population. Now the whole reason Evolution happens at all (the reason things change into new species, develop new features), is because every generation there's a chance that a gene will randomly change out of nowhere (something that wasn't in the gene pool before will suddenly be there now). So in mutating population, the generalized statement is different, it's more like "passing around genes and sometimes we get something new." So you can see the difference, if you're just passing around the same set of genes, there's no space or possibility for growth (toward optimization), but if your constantly getting new genes to try out then you absolutely have a chance to achieve optimization. So the reason this matters is that this teaches us something about biological evolution, If life did not mutate it's genes during reproduction, then Evolution would not happen for essentially the same reason, you would get no ability to create novel new features of life that would have let it develop past the single cell (develop INTO the single cell, frankly). Without mutation, life would not exist. One more thing on this later.

.

So putting the evolution of the Eye and discussion of Intelligent Design as a consequence of the misconseption of Evolution aside, let's return to the misconception of Evolution itself and begin to talk about how it should really be viewed.  Evolution has been described here as taking on an active form when in the public forum so that the public understand it to be an active process (more or less). In it's most egregious phrasing, as well, it takes on the active voice, which simply compounds the issue, obviously. And, additionally, we've talked about how this form phrasing has essentially led to a religious movement that detracts from our understanding of proper Evolution having room to be created that without the active voice, would never have made sense to exist. So everyone thinks that Evolution is an active process. They think it is a forced mechanism applied to nature in some external sense, like someone somewhere is turning the dials. More importantly, it seems as though, they are waiting around and researching to find a better theory that will outright replace Evolution.


The reality about Evolution is far more passive, cohesive, weighty, and significant. Evolution is a law of Nature. It's a property of the living system itself. When life is let loose in an organic environment, the evolution process can't NOT happen. When evolutionary biologists talk about selection, they usually know what they mean, and it isn't in an agent making a choice sense. While this may not be the literal way your average person takes it, this sense is somehow still disseminated to the public by the phrasing "natural selection." What they're referring to is genes surviving into the future of the gene pool, "selection" is effectively the state of existing in the next generation. To the experts, the environment is "selecting" the genes that continue to exist and those that are killed off. While this is true in a sense, if they want to say it this way, they have it backwards. The environment is really "selecting" which genes to "remove" from the gene pool, those that stay, "just happened" to survive, there is no action taken that marked they're survival like their counterpart organisms who died.  


Take the example of the polar bear, they started out as brown bears like all bears did at one time. Those bears that found themselves in 100% wintry environments would have mutations that would lighten their fur ever so slightly. In a given generation, the population would be split across varied shades of fur. Those bears that had fairer fur (closer to the color of the snow) could hide better and would be less likely to be eaten a predator. These bears would survive (what's important to realize, contrary to conventional evolution thinking, is that survival is completely passive, nothing special is happening), and genes for fairer fur would be able to be passed to the next generation. On the other hand, the bears with the darker fur would stand out in the snow and be easier targets for predators (realize that being a victim of the environment is active, death is an active event, it happened as a result of a series of events), thus their brown fur genes would be removed from the gene pool. While the fairer fur genes are increasing and compounding in fairness due to lighter and lighter mutations, the darker fur genes are being removed from the population. So what is going on in the big picture is a tip of the balance from brown to white. And it's not driven by an active survival process. It's technically driven by an active (non-sentient) death process. It's the removal of the brown bear gene that's the key to the dominance of the polar bear. Otherwise they would both exist next to each other. So the death of the brown gene in wintry environments is what made the polar bear the polar bear.


This is the way evolution actually works, it does not reward good traits except in the sense of leaving them completely alone and letting them live their lives free and clear. They get no "you have good a fitness with the environment" award. However, have bad traits, and you are immediately punished. That's where the action is. We usually think of it backwards because we place the phrasing "natural selection" in the wrong place. Evolution is truly more interested in removing organisms from the gene pool than adding them. Whatever survives: it doesn't care. This is the heart of the passive nature of Evolution. The survivors are not part of the evolution process, they are literally outside the system. You don't want to be touched by evolution, it usually means you're being selected for death. "Selection" would have been a way more appropriate word for the word that described the death of an organism and removal from the gene pool. It would have an "agent" (Death) right there and ready if any discussion of active/passive came up. There would be no problem having an passive Evolution process and a "active" death process called "Selection." At least the selection process in that case couldn't have been countermanded by a God disseminating His Will any way He saw fit, because it would already have been taken up by Death.


This is a very different picture than what you're used to seeing from the standard Evolution narrative: organisms compete for resources in an finite environment and those with disadvantageous traits die, while those with those with advantageous traits are "selected" for survival and their traits are passed on to the next generation after some mutation. While you may not have thought of it in this way, this is a description of an active process. There is an absent, missing, or phantom someone or something that's implied to be "selecting" the survivors in this story based on their advantageous traits. In fact, there is no activity happening to the survivors of Evolution, they simply aren't dying. Nothing could be more passive. What's actively happening is that organisms are being killed by the environment. But this technically isn't an "active" process because there is no agency behind the Death process. It's just a law of nature, it's as passive a process as gravity. Therefore making the new interpretation, given above, centered on the deaths of the organisms in the Evolution process, rather than the survivors, you make that interpretation passive rather than active, and remove the phantom Agency that had been misguidedly been added to Evolution by the experts since the discovery of Evolution by Charles Darwin, and which was never modified by modern scientists unfortunately.


So one last thing I wanted to leave with and it has to do with mutation. So there's not a lot of understanding of mutation in the general public about what mutation really is and what it's not. I think some people think it's this special process we discovered as part of the reproductive cycle that someone just happens to benefit us by giving us mutations, but otherwise mutations aren't all that important. Well, as I talked about before, they are hands down the more import thing when it comes to Evolution. Without genes randomly changing, life wouldn't evolve. Which means we Humans wouldn't exist, no life would exist. And when you realize what a mutation is it's even more remarkable. It's just a mistake. It's simple statistics. The chances of a certain chemical reaction happening a certain way is a certain number, and it's not 100%. It's that simple. The chances of the chemical reaction that copies the gene from one DNA strand to the other has a finite probability less than 1. Simple. That's mutation. That's Evolution. But here's where it get's really interesting. So we Humans wouldn't exist withtout mutations, these simple mistakes. But think of all the time, energy, religious fervor, violence, pain, suffering, and death that has been given over for Man's pursuit of Perfection. Perfection in Morals, Virtue, Art, Beauty, Glory, Law, and Divinity, etc. But in reality we owe our entire existence to nothing but simple unavoidable imperfection. As much as we've longed for perfection, and saught perfection, thought perfection was the answer, it turns out that if the most basic process to life was perfect, the evolution process never would have created us at all.


Imperfection is literally written on our very DNA. We as Humans fully embody imperfection. And I wanted to leave you with the message to embrace your imperfection. If you make a mistake writing something down, just think about DNA being copied about it's necessity to life itself :-)