The science fiction genre has been telling us stories about extraterrestrial life for over a century. Stories that range in topic from your basic first contact story to armed battle conflict, human origin stories, stories where aliens share their advanced technology with us (to the usual overall betterment of humanity--e.g. Star  Trek), and large scale intergalactic wars and politics (e.g. Isaac Asimov's The Foundation series). Either the aliens making contact are here for Earth's resources and want to annihilate the indigenous species (us) to get them (Independence Day), or (as people actually believe happens, like the very real culture surrounding the supposed Area 51 in New Mexico) they want to secretly abduct humans for study. In other common Sci-Fi scenarios, aliens have laid seeds (DNA) that burgeoned all life on Earth, and they have either returned to make contact (Mission to Mars [2000]) or the story follows what happens to the "engineers" after they have seeded the planet and humans catch up to them (Prometheus and Alien: Covenant). 

Another very common trope in Sci-Fi depicts aliens in full tilt worship and homage to the human race as being the greatest thing in the cosmos. The human spirit, they revere, is the shining light to which they themselves aspire. With all their technology, space exploration, and apparent communing with countless species throughout the galaxy, these aliens cherish human's capacity for love and their never ending guile and spirit to push on in the face of unfavorable conditions as the most valuable thing in the cosmos (e.g. A.I. Artificial Intelligence [2001]).

.

There are a couple of common threads that persist throughout all these tropes. They have been so reinforced in last century of the genre that you can no longer abstain from using the basic ones in your Sci-Fi story if you want it to be taken seriously--how ever scientifically off base they may be. But it's just fiction you say.... Yes, it is just fiction. And as fiction, it's fine, obviously. But unfortunately, the saturation of these stories into the public consciousness, and the nature of human thinking, has caused legitimate scientists to be influenced in their search for extraterrestrial life by this genre. It's a game of chicken and egg, but an argument can be made that it has caused evolutionary biologists to be influenced as to whether certain human traits are universal life traits or only traits specific to the human species, like self identity, autonomy, intelligence, society, and civilization.  Everyone already thinks "intelligence" is a universal characteristic that can be attained independent of our evolutionary ancestry. We're constantly in search of "intelligent" extraterrestrial life, as if it's inevitable given "enough" evolution. But is there a basis for believing this? More on this later. 

So how scientifically off base is the Sci-Fi genre when it comes to extraterrestrial life? For one thing, the most obvious way, to me at least, is that in all these stories the aliens have a society and civilization similar to our own. Think of any movie you've seen about alien contact, they come in a big ship and they either walk out or fly out individually just like a group of people would (e.g. Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Independence Day, Start Trek: The Next Generation, ad infinitum). 

If all life in the universe had a single source (Which it very well may, I can't say that I know either way, which would make this whole posting moot. But let's assume for the sake of probability and blogging that there is not some overseeing alien species seeding all the planets in the universe with life from a single ancestor with some master universal life experimental plan.) then for life on different planets to have such high level characteristics in common would not seem so improbable. But in the much more likely scenario, where life is manifest on each planet in an independent way, and follows an independent evolutionary tree based on an accumulation of innumerable mutations along each of it's species branches making them all individually unique in the pool of all species in all the universe, then these high level characteristics are unique to one species and cannot be shared by another. The higher level, more complex, the characteristic is, the less likely it will appear in any other species with whom it does not share a common ancestor (any extraterrestrial species most definitely and certainly not sharing a common ancestor with humans or any other life form on Earth, given the proviso above). 

What's worse is that having society and civilization requires other high level, complex characteristics that aliens couldn't have. To be in a society like ours, they must be highly social, they must be able to relate to each other in complex ways. They must be able to create small and large groups of individuals that accumulate to eventually include the entire population of individuals. Notice the key word: individual. We take it for granted that all organisms have an individual sense because we can visually distinguish individual organisms, but it's actually not so obvious (we tend to only be able to see things from our perspective, and only through our own eyes). Other life on this planet doesn't have the same sense of "self" that you feel, this feeling you have is what makes you human, and give you the sense of Free Will that you feel. It provides an infinitely vast inner world that is completely separate from the external world and makes you feel like a guest on this planet. But more on that later.

.

These tropes exist in Sci-Fi, I think they started there. But they also exist in real science, much to the bane of my existence. Prominent scientists, with influence, have thought this way throughout the 20th century. People like Enrico Fermi, an otherwise respected Physicists, went on to make statements about extraterrestrial life and to coin a paradox to his name centered on the lack of evidence for alien life in the face of such high estimates for the existence of such life. The problem with Fermi was that he framed his entire through process about alien life around alien civilizations, their development of technology, and their progression into a space exploring species. To the casual listener: any scientist groveling at his feet by the time in his career he was making these statements and the general public, what he was saying sounded like the wisdom brought down from the Mountain by Moses on stone tablets. No one was going to question Fermi, and anyway it doesn't sound like there's anything wrong with this line of thinking. Nothing else anyone knew of aliens contradicted with his unspoken vision of  their life-cycle processes, on the surface (intelligence, civilization, technology, space exploration: we did it, why wouldn't it always happen this way?) (Sci-Fi is the only other source for most people, including legitimate scientists, remember). 

But when you think about it from an evolutionary perspective and realize how precarious evolution really is, how the accumulation of mutations always produces vastly different results, coupled with how fragile the traits we have and cherish (intelligence, self, identity, etc.) are all a result of our particular evolutionary history and are not just inevitabilities, you realize how life that evolves independent of our evolutionary ancestry has no chance of developing any traits in common with us, so they won't be primates, they won't have brains, they most certainly won't have selves, which means they won't be individuals.

So how could extraterrestrial life have a civilization? It's such a human centric concept. It's like asking why doesn't the shrimp species form a Corporation. Do shrimp have selves? No. They are running on auto-pilot. They can't see themselves from the third person point of view, like us. If they could, they would be autonomous like us, and we would have to negotiate with the nation of shrimp. It would be the ethical dilemma of the millennium. 

So ideas like intelligence, civilization, social behavior, identity, self, and technology are words that we as humans in the 21st century are very familiar with either through exposure to the Sci-Fi genre or popular science, and most of us, even legitimate scientists believe these concepts are universal for all life given "enough" evolution. Or that evolution is capable of producing them again on a probabilistic rate. But are these ideas really universal for life itself? Do we have the data to support, or even suggest, that these ideas are inevitabilities and not just outliers? We'll talk more about this later, but for now,  what's unfortunate about Fermi's work is that it has influenced a generation of scientists. They all consider themselves "skeptics and doubters of the data,"  and while many have taken issue with his work in various ways, none have challenged his basic premise that we are fundamentally looking for a civilization of extraterrestrials. None of the skeptics for a second question what they hear from someone they consider a great mind like Fermi and what they have to say at the fundamental level.

Another scientific group that has influenced a generation of new scientists and the general public is the group that developed the Drake Equation. The Drake equation, headed up by Dr. Frank Drake, is a probabilistic equation that includes six probabilities for factors that would lead to the existence of alien civilizations we may communicate with. The problem is right in the intent of the equation. It's trying to find alien "civilizations" for us to communicate with. When looking at the individual terms in this equation, the problems become more prominent. 




Drake Equation

N = R*p*n*L*I*c*T




R = rate of start formation

p = fraction of stars that have planets

n  = of starts that have planets, planets that can potentially support life

L = fraction of those planets that actually develop life

I = fraction of planets bearing life that intelligent, civilized life,  has developed

c = fraction of those civilizations that have developed communications (i.e. technologies that release signals into space)

T = length of time that those signals have been released into space



[c] = https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drake_equation





Most of the first few terms dealing with stars are pretty standard "alien life probability terms" and aren't too problematic, but when you get down to the intelligent life terms and the sentiment of "civilized life" or "life that has formed a civilization" enters the mix, you start to see the extraordinary bias these scientists had toward their own world and way of living, without any regard for what was possible outside the human or earth system. It is literally a case of a bunch of old white men getting together an hoping to find a bunch of like minded white aliens. And the worst part is that people today forget that part, and still use this equation in serious ways. This equation has been written in the books. It will be used to one day plan missions to explore worlds where possible life may live. And we will certainly be wasting our time, looking in the wrong place, and all because the originator of the equation couldn't realize that aliens would never have a civilization.  This is why this is so important.

.

To quickly reiterate, Sci-Fi and many scientists claim consistently that aliens would be organized into a civilization, which requires several other high level and complex traits. It requires that they are social the way we are, which suggests aliens have a personal identity, meaning they have a sense of self, which (avoiding the discussion about the physical brain per se) literally means they would need an exact physical image in their brain organ of a "self", equivalent to the image of the self that we possess. So why are these such a problem? First of all for an alien to have the same type of thing as a "self" it would need a human brain. But it can't have one of those. It can't it's own organ that is an analog to our brain, but drawing any comparison between ours and theirs is a vast stretch. So an alien with a self is a tall order. (What's cool to think about is what the alien's "brain" organ would do for it in lieu of a "self," the possibilities are literally endless, and I'm surprised there hasn't been a Sci-Fi author creative enough to come up with material along those lines [to Sci-Fi fan-boys: I'm open to being corrected if I'm wrong, I don't know enough about the genre to count this possibility out, so please let me know if I'm wrong and some such material exists, I'd be happy to learn]). Which crumbles the whole edifice, all the way up  to civilization, from the bottom. But if aliens could have an organ that's analogous to our brain then it's "possible" that they could have sense of self, and be autonomous? Why can't they be social? It seems so natural that they would be, that these are universal characteristics of life. I mean, look around. So many species on earth are social, they communicate. Obviously, these are universal life traits, rights, not just human life traits?

Probably not. Or at least, think about it from the evolutionary perspective again. All of life on this planet is related. We all draw our evolutionary roots back to a single ancestor. Even though it appears that there is a vast diversity of life on this planet, there is in fact only one single solitary form of life on this planet. Life happened a single time on Earth. Millions of species exists, but life as a whole is a single thing. It only exists once. There is one data point. Whatever characteristics we have as humans (brains, selves, identities, ids, social behavior, civilization, the frontal cortex, etc.), and whatever characteristics we share with other species, it's only counted once. And it's only counted on Earth. It doesn't apply to any other evolution that happens on any other planet.

But before we get into that, let's talk about these characteristics of humans that we keep lazily applying to aliens as if they were universal. We seem to do it without even noticing. So first of all, do you notice in your own experience, that you have an identity? That you can think about "yourself" as distinct from the "thinker". Do you consider yourself a "person"? The reason you do all these things is because your brain manifests an "image" for you that creates a feeling that is so visceral and grounded that you don't even feel like a mammal. It's just a feeling that's caused by the mammal's brain that makes it think it's an entirely different type of being: a person. That's you. Really. This is called the "self" or the "id". In neurological terms it's an image that your neurons create inside your brain that give other parts of your brain the impression that a "person" exists and this "person" is the owner of the brain and the body. As a side effect, a vastly infinite internal world is created inside your head that no one else has direct access to where you can have whatever other "image" (thought) you wish (sometimes ones you don't wish). And this creates a separation between the mental space "you" occupy (the "self", the inner world) from the "real" external world. It causes in us this feeling like we aren't part of that external world (nature) but are guests in it, that we are somehow "unnatural" like we have been placed here mistakenly, so that anything we do is called "man made" and any action we take in the natural world is immediately tainting it with our "unnatural" fingers. The literature movement of the 18th and 19th centuries proves this feeling exists in us at the basic level in it's title of "Man vs Nature". And it's all a misconception, an illusion. We cannot be unnatural. It's impossible. There is no difference between what bears do to their environment and what man does to his. We have this feeling of being unnatural guests in nature, but it's just a feeling caused as a side effect of the shared image in all our of heads: the "self" that makes us feel separate from the real world and trapped in our inner world at a distance away from nature. The feeling is an impression of the side effect of our possession of the image of the "self" as a result of biological evolution.  The very thing that gave us such an evolutionary advantage, today in the 21th century, causes so much guilt.

The self is what gives us our autonomy (a more acceptable version of free will--that's a whole other post though). If you're every wondering whether a species is autonomous or not, if it can see it self from the third person point of view and thus has control over itself, if it has a self or not, run this thought experiment: if it's possible for you to give the organism a pain stimulus and it has enough control to react in any other way except a pain reaction, then it has demonstrated autonomy, however, if it has no choice by to react to pain stimulus with a pain reaction, then it is not autonomous. 

Now, you may ask, why do we have the self? A lot of people think (because they don't do much of it) that we have it as a result of having a soul, or because evolution completed it's goal of reaching it's zenith with the human and the self was it's greatest creation--that any evolution process will inevitably result in the production of a self for it's superior species. This is how most people think, sadly. But there are two things wrong with that last statement. Evolution produces nothing that was inevitable, and it does not produce superior species. These are probably shocking statements for most people who haven't had much exposure to real evolutionary study. Unfortunately, evolution is a very misunderstood process. But it is central to the discussion of extraterrestrial life, so let's clear some things up briefly.

.

Evolution is a process that hones species for the current or changing environment, it cares not for superiority, it cares not for goals. It's extraordinarily simple, passive, and natural. All that's happening is that organisms with traits that are not suited for the environment that they are in die, thus, their genes leave the pool and are not passed on. And organisms that survive the environment live, thus, keeping those genes in the pool and they are passed on. So from the perspective of later generations, later generations tend to look and act more like previous generations who tended to survive in their environment better than those who tended to die off. As an added bonus, during reproduction, mistakes are made when copying the DNA, which really means that novel genetic information is constantly being injected into the gene pool. Which translates to traits getting more and more complex with each passing generation. This is the answer to how the Eye is so complex. Mutations would add variety to the eye structure, several would die out, but one or two would survive because of all the mutations of that generation, a few just so happened to give a slight advantage to further reproduction. Then the next generation, another mutation would add more complexity and more functionality. Over millions of years, mutations (adding information) coupled with death (removing information) would accumulate and hone to create the functioning eyes we have today. No need for an Intelligent Designer.

(As a side note, the Intelligent Designer is the saddest misconception I think I've ever heard because the blame for it is all on the scientists shoulders. Bare with me. Did you notice earlier when I mentioned that evolution is a "simple, passive, natural" process? The key word in that sentence is passive. What's so depressing about the way evolutionary biologists talk about evolution in public is that they try to make it easy for people to understand, so they "simplify" it by making it active because people naturally understand a process when there is an agent carrying out the operation. So they invented this word "selected", as in "the evolution process 'selected' X species",  to mean a species has survived it's environment and has reproduced to make the next generation. Unfortunately, they have things backwards. Species aren't selected by evolution, evolution doesn't exist (per se). It's not a thing, it's not an agent, it's not the hand of God. There is no one "choosing" which species are "selected". But by using that word, in that way, the scientists, open the door for the Religious among us to invent for themselves the agent that was so desperately missing from their statements. They were asking for it. The reality is actually the opposite, species are selected to die, because the environment kills them. Nature is the Intelligent Designer if you will. Death is the Intelligent Designer. The process is actually just sitting back and waiting for things to die, not caring who survives. If a species does, no one throws a party. The process is actually just a law of nature on the living system itself. Any other reproductive system that functions against a working environment (limited resources, limited living conditions, etc.) would function the same way, it couldn't be avoided. And no additional rules would need to set in place. Evolution would just happen. It's entirely passive. If it were discussed properly from the beginning by the scientists who actually understand it, then there would be no room for any religious organizations to have invented the active Intelligent Designer.)

So evolution didn't set out to produce a human that would walk on two legs with a brain that would be social and would be part of a civilization, etc.. It didn't set out to produce a human mammal that would have a sense of self, that would believe it was an entirely different being called a "person", that would have a vastly infinite inner world that was separate from the outer world, that would make the human feel like a guest on it's own planet. All evolution was doing was letting certain primates die when they couldn't hack the environment anymore and mutating the genes of other primates giving them randomly different traits in a game of trial and error to see what would survive the best. It just so happened that having the primate walk on two legs seemed to work, so that stuck. Then (forgive the timeline, I'm not claiming knowledge of anthropology, it's not important here) a mutation caused suddenly an image to form in the brain of the advanced primate walking on two legs. This new image ripped it out of the auto-pilot the animal was in up to that point and put it squarely in the autonomous driver seat.  It now had a sense of itself, it had perspective on the world around it.  It could negotiate the world, plan long term, think complex abstract thoughts, see the others around it, take care of them better, for the betterment of itself and the group, introspect, all from within the infinitely vast inner world created by the newly created image of the "self" that a random mutation bestowed upon it. And with this self, the advanced primate was more likely to survive, by pure happenstance. But it didn't have to be that way. This is what people forget.

The introduction of the self, in the evolutionary timeline of human development could very well have been a misstep that led to our species' extinction. But we are lucky enough that it led to its flourishing. We take it for granted. We take it so much for granted that when we imagine other species evolving on other planets, we imagine them going through the exact same steps of evolution that we went through. But that is mathematically improbable. And I would really like to say "literally impossible," but the mathematician in me refuses to mislead my audience with absolutes I know I can't claim. (It's theoretically possible, but the odds are most likely 1 in more than 10 times the number of atoms in the universe, so it's impossible, there I said it)

Over the course of the millions and billions of  years of evolution that it takes to result in a species with "intelligence," the number of mutations that compound make it virtually impossible that any sequence of traits would be repeated from one closed evolutionary system to another.

.

So you may be asking, why does all this matter so much? Why did I write this long piece trying to explain how aliens won't have selves. Who cares? Well, I wouldn't have any issue with Sci-Fi telling stories that make no sense about aliens communing with humans the way we deal with other countries in the United Nations, if it didn't influence the science of how we think about extraterrestrial life and evolutionary biology so much. Science Fiction is a very powerful genre. It speaks to our inner child in such a strong way that we are very reluctant to give the stories up. It influences everybody, even scientists, so much so that the direction of research is changed as a result of what these scientists believe is the right way to take the research. So if they believe the right thing to look for is alien civilizations then they will look for that, and if the reality is that there is no such thing because all of our thinking has been misguided for half a century, then we would have wasted decades of scientific research that could have otherwise been put to good use. The same goes for what the general public thinks in the public consciousness. What they think matters, and when they believe certain things, those things influence what gets funding for scientific research, ultimately.  

What I've found when bouncing these ideas off of people in the general public is a great deal of push back. And it was a great deal puzzling to me for a long time why what I considered well formed arguments were being treated with such vitriol and distain. People really hated what I had to say, they really thought I was off my rocker. And I finally realized what may have been going on. In a way, what we are looking for out of science fiction, the Fermi Paradox, and the Drake Equation is ourselves. The civilization, the implied identity, self, technology, space program, etc. are all features and traits of the human race. We seem to want validation that we aren't just a random aberration, that our traits are universal in this cosmos. We want to know that other processes of evolution on other planets would produce similar results to us, so we aren't strange, weird, or alone. We need to believe this. It's not just a question on our mind or a curiosity, it's a need for us to believe that we are not alone. It's a longing. We hope to find compatriots out there in the cosmos who think like us, act like us, behave like us, and are civilized like us. And here I am trying to argue that we are necessarily alone in the cosmos, that it is impossible for evolution to ever recreate something similar to what it created on planet Earth. And people hate that.

But I think there's integrity in being alone. There is nothing that will be like us. We are singular. Humans will never be replicated. Our traits will never be copied: personhood, selves, civilizations, social behavior, intelligence, these are humanity's traits and no one else's. The only thing we can ever say about alien life for sure is that it will be "some form of matter that behaves in a manner that is slightly non-random." Beyond this, no other realistic definition can be applied. 

And that is the best opening line to a Sci-Fi story I think I've ever heard. And the only proposal requesting funding for radio time at any of the radio telescopes looking for extraterrestrial signals that I think should be accepted.








.