I think through a thought till I get to the end, but then when I think of it, and I know that I don't.

Instead of the end I come to a bend, and around it I go, expecting to see absolutely nothing exceptionally new. But instead though, off to the side, casually, leaning with formidable standing so actually, I see you.

Your smirk says too much and your eyes say too little, your posture assertive and your nose in the middle. My previous thought has been clearly forgot, for the moment I'm struck by this alien sight, I ponder if talking would be something I might, but as far as I know, I'm here for a reason, I need something to show, so I dare not take flight from the purpose remembered that was to get to the end of this thought with the bend as my plight.

As I go my own way, and it brings me past you standing there so cursorily, I happen to ask if you have any advice for a fellow in this strange curvy land. You give me no notice, but seem to consider telling me something that might assist me off hither. Then, you look up at me prime, with eyes worth a dime, and you tell me a secret in a dark and all too familiar rhyme.

"Before you reach what you seek, this 'thought with an end,' be warned now that you will first see a bend. The truth is that it circles back on itself. It does this in the most deceiving of ways, it will make you think progress, but I tell you right now, only static it stays"

Your prophesy done, you resumed your cool stance, and nothing about you signals a chance, for me to say anything further or continue to seek an answer or progress for any but reason, lest like a fool I should dance.

So casually I go on my way to what end I know not, certainly not on this path, as it is like a knot. Whatever I do, I continue to think, for a bit little longer, however, around no more bends do I even dare wonder. Slowly I tied to forget what I sought, I started confusing the direction for the taking. I was getting lost in this place, and as for the thought, I took your advice, I got completely distracted, and thankfully, I forgot.

I was finally free of the cycle of thinking thoroughly through that thought that tricked me and got me askew. If I had not met you, in that maze of that world, of an inner man’s struggle to become something new, then I’d still be trapped there twirling around, like the dance of a fool who is wearing a crown.

That thought and its vicious confusing attacks of deceit and temptation, for receipt of some closure the thinker does seek, has been all but gone. Apart from the nausea from circles abound, I did manage to see something there I was glad to have found, and while I think my mind conceives against me some sort of elaborate thinking plot, I was saved by an oracle, you I forgot not.

So in that land of the perniciously decieving bends where I became but askew, I remember seeing you there, and I wish all the same, but all the equally new too, so I wish to say to you now, since I could not at the first, if we are to see the other again, that is heartily up to you.